---
title: "Linear mechanical switches are good for office work"
excerpt: "My experiments with mechanical keyboards have made me understand my preferences better. Linear switches are fine for what I do."
---

I have been using tactile switches for most of my time with a
mechanical keyboard. They provide clear feedback when a key is
actuated. They also have a firm resistance to their pre-travel, which
helps reduce accidental key presses that can otherwise happen by
resting your fingers on the caps. Overall, tactile switches, and their
noisier clicky counterparts, are well suited for long typing sessions
because they are easy to make sense of.

The suitability of those switches for writing is reflected in their
accompanying promotional material. Manufacturers label them as a good
choice for typists or, depending on the specific switch, an all-round
capable option for gaming and office work alike.

Since I do not play any computer games with the keyboard, I can only
judge the typing experience and, yes, tactile switches live up to
their marketing. But are vendors right in all their claims? In
particular, are linear switches intended for gaming and, perhaps, are
ill-suited for other use-cases?

## The little experiment

The tactile bump or unmistakable click are clear indicators for a
successful key registration, but is such feedback necessary? To test
whether I was benefiting from it, I devised a simple experiment: I put
on headphones, played back a video while setting the audio level to a
reasonably high level, and used my linear switch set (Keychron K Pro
Silver, of which I wrote about in a previous publication:
<https://protesilaos.com/keeb/2024-07-02-keychron-banana-silver-switches/>).
The goal was to do some long-form writing and then reflect on how it
felt.

It took me about 45 minutes to write an entry for my journal. I wrote
it in my typical alla prima style, meaning that I did it in one go,
only to quickly review the text at the end for typos. At no point did
I feel I was inhibited by the lack of tactile or audible feedback.
Words were flowing nicely and my fingers had no problem activating the
keys with accuracy. The visual confirmation I was discerning on the
screen while typing was enough for me to have confidence in my
keystrokes, so I could keep the momentum going. I thus concluded that
the switch type was not an irreducible factor of what I like in a
switch. Further experiments were not necessary, as I had already
noticed this phenomenon.

Factors such as how much force it takes to actuate the key and how
scratchy or not the press feels are far more important to me. I value
consistency and appreciate a setup that does not tire me out over the
course of a prolonged writing session. Whether the switch type is
linear, tactile, or clicky is relevant only to the extent that it
enables the qualities I am seeking.

## The marketing is fine, albeit simplistic

Linear switches are typically labelled as suitable for gaming. There
probably is truth to this claim: the direct keystroke does not
interfere with fast-paced repeated key presses, the absence of a
noticeable click does not bother fellow players, while a lighter force
helps minimise strain in extended press-and-hold events.

What I am interested in though is office work, where I think the
gamer-focused narrative of linear switches is not helpful. I was
originally negatively predisposed to linear switches because I thought
I was not part of their target audience. But this changed quickly
after I used clicky switches, which are supposed to be optimised for
typists: the click felt gimmicky and was mostly a distraction. Instead
of keeping my stream of consciousness uninterrupted, I was constantly
being reminded "Hey, did you notice the click? Here... Here... The
click!!!"

This kept happening for the whole duration of my typing session. I
continued using clickies for a few more days to confirm I had gone
through the adjustment period. I now think they are fine, though
nothing special. I never developed an appreciation for the
typist-friendly designation and consider it inaccurate. At best, those
are suitable for someone who enjoys the added audible feedback which,
I assume, can include gamers.

## The lightness of typing

The linear switches I am using are smooth all across the keystroke. I
do not notice any scratch. There also are no weird pinging sounds
coming from inside the switch, something that did happen with other
tactile switches, which made them borderline clicky.

Linear switches have the understated quality of blending into the
background of your awareness, as they do not have any pronounced
attribute that constantly reminds you of their presence. No tactile
bumps; no clicks; no extraneous noises. Just a predictable press,
which is simple and super effective.

My newfound fondness for linear switches has helped me understand
myself better and develop a more refined taste for these mechanical
components of my keyboard. Consistency is the best feature. Not
feeling like I am typing against sandpaper is also essential. Then it
all comes down to how sharp the rebound is, what the pre-travel should
be, and the like.

I see myself using linear switches for the foreseeable future. I am
happy with the Keychron K Pro Silver model, though I will try to
experiment with some of their heavier counterparts at some point (not
soon though, as this is working nicely).

The gist is that personal preference matters the most. Though we can
only learn what we truly like---and thus who we are in this respect---by
being out there in the world, trying things, and learning along the way.
Perhaps this process of self-discovery is what fascinates the most
beside the technicalities of having a keyboard setup that (i) helps
alleviate my RSI and (ii) empowers me to write at length, which is my
favourite activity on the computer.
