---
title: "What I learnt from the Colemak keyboard layout"
excerpt: "In this article I explain how I tried to switch to Colemak but ultimately decided against it."
---

As part of the research I did on ways to alleviate my keyboard-induced
repetitive stress injury, I read about alternatives to the de facto
standard Qwerty layout. I was not deeply invested in Qwerty at the
time, as I did not know how to touch type properly. Switching to
another layout would inevitably cost an immediate reduction in my
words-per-minute output but would not be too bad. So I tried Colemak,
specifically the Colemak-DH variant, for almost 3 weeks (hereinafter
"Colemak" covers Colemak-DH). It was well worth my time for all the
things I discovered in the process, but I ultimately switched back to
Qwerty.

## Colemak helped me use all fingers for touch typing

The time I spent with Colemak-DH was fruitful, as I forced myself to
not rely on bad habits I had developed over time on standard, row
stagger keyboards. I started using all fingers to actuate keys and
learnt to move the right finger for the given column. What I got from
this exercise is the practice of resting my fingers on the home row,
something that I did not do before: I would curl the right hand to be
somewhat diagonally on the board, with index where Qwerty N is and the
pinky on P.

Another factor in this change is the column stagger of the Iris
keyboard I have been using. It makes so much more sense to me, as I
have an easier time predicting where my finger needs to move to input
a character. On a row stagger, such as what I have on the laptop's
keyboard, I still make a ton of mistakes in terms of which fingers
activates what character.

## I do not get the home-row emphasis

One of the much-touted advantages of Colemak over Qwerty is the
frequency of home row keys to type text in English. The argument is
that this results in a more comfortable typing session, as overall
finger movement is reduced. I was curious to try that for myself, only
to realise that finger movement is actually a good thing for me, at
least on the Iris.

Finger movement sounds more difficult because you are forced to cover
more space. Though in my experience it is more relaxing to have a
little bit of extra travel as fingers do not remain fixed in one
position for too long: they stretch out more frequently. I liken this
to any kind of stretching we do, which is better for us than remaining
still for too long.

## If less finger travel is good, then so are fewer keys

If you browse fora of keyboard enthusiasts who are into split
ergonomic builds, you get the feeling that the fewer the keys, the
greater the comfort. As with the premise of Colemak, the idea is
plausible: keep everything close to the home row and take it one step
further by limiting all motions to 1 key unit at most ("1 key unit" is
the space occupied by an alphanumeric key and is often expressed as
"1u").

This contradicts my experience. Fewer keys make the keyboard less
comfortable to me. Fingers travel less, i.e. they do not flex as much,
and the firmware-level modifications to add more layers become
increasingly complex.

I do use layers and do enjoy the QMK feature for one-shot modifiers.
But there is a clear trade-off between compactness and simplicity: the
more compact a design, the more complex and idiosyncratic it gets.

## A few extra keys are fine

To this end, I reaffirmed my preference for a number row on my
keyboard. Because numbers and their corresponding symbols are readily
available, the layer 1 I use can combine special characters and
movement keys while still being accessible from both halves of the
keyboard. Whereas having many layers leads to other compromises with
the layout of the thumb cluster, such as a key on the left hand
activating layer 1 and a key on the right doing the same for layer 2.
Then a third layer can be accessed by holding down both thumb keys...
Just thinking about this triggers my RSI. The knock-on effect of more
layers is the removal of one or more modifiers from the thumbs and the
reliance on other techniques such as key combinations or home-row
tap/hold configurations.

For me, home-row modifiers are not comfortable. They depend on precise
timing to register a tap versus a hold and feel cognitively heavy as a
result. I mistrigger them frequently and end up making a lot of
mistakes which inevitably break my flow. This is especially
problematic for the way I type prose, as I write words non-stop and
only do a final spellcheck at the end. Every misfired home-row
sequence adds considerable friction and engenders frustration.

A dedicated placement for modifiers, combined with the one-shot
functionality, is the most comfortable setup I have ever used. The
Iris has four keys on the thumb, which is the optimal number for me.
More would be hard to reach, while fewer would lead to compromises
along the lines of the aforementioned.

## A lateral step at best

I ultimately switched back to Qwerty because I could not convince
myself that Colemak was actually making my experience more
comfortable. I suspect that the apparent comfort reported by many
comes from a combination of factors not limited to the keyboard
layout, such as being more mindful of one's typing technique, fixing
their posture, getting a split keyboard with a column stagger, finding
the best key switches and the right keycap profile for them, and so
on.

Is Colemak bad? No. Though I cannot consider it a clear improvement
over the status quo either. It is a side step with, perhaps, some
marginal gains. This is a subjective matter, anyway, as one size does
not fit all. The gist is that any person who feels discomfort while
typing needs to identify the source of their woes, learn from the
community, though do not hesitate to think critically and apply
judgement about the specifics of their case.

I realised that my problem was not with Qwerty per se but with the
ulnar deviation imposed by the overall design of standard keyboards.
The split of the Iris keyboard combined with its column stagger are a
clear upgrade, as I can type for much longer without feeling any pain
whatsoever (whereas before I would write for 5 minutes, feel numbness,
and then pain shortly thereafter). In fact, I am gaining strength and
suspect that I will eventually need to change to switches that require
greater force to be actuated. This is fine, as comfort is relative to
our current state.

The experience with Colemak was insightful. I learnt a lot about
myself and am happy with the outcome.
