---
title: "Introduction to mechanical key switches"
excerpt: "The basics of key switches for those getting started with mechanical keyboards."
---

The switch is the part of the keyboard hardware that sends the key
press. On mechanical keyboards, each key has its own switch, all of
which connect to the same circuit board. Many keyboards are
"hot-swappable", meaning that the user can change the switch by
pulling it out and placing another in its stead: there is an
intermediate socket that is attached to the board, so switches can
easily be swapped out, which helps with experimentation.

As with everything pertaining to mechanical keyboards, the choice of
switch is subjective.

# The most common switch is MX type

There are several switches, though by far the most common one is the
MX. You can tell it apart by the shape of its stem (the top part that
connects to the keycap), which has the shape of the plus sign.

Some MX switches have walls around the stem. They are marketed as
"dust-proof", "less wobbly", and the like. They still count as MX
switches for our purposes.

Knowing this is important when searching for keycaps. Those that are
designed for "choc" switches, for example, are not compatible with the
MX ones.

Note that the MX switches are of a "normal" height, though there are
some switches that are "low-profile" yet still have the familiar MX
stem. Those are not compatible with most keycaps that are designed for
the normal height, as the bottom side of the cap will hit against the
board, which will cause damages over time.

The low-profile switches look shorter as they have a compact body,
whereas the normal height is considerably more blocky. Consider
low-profile switches only if you understand the implications with
regard to the keycaps you can combine them with (and if they are
compatible with your keyboard).

# Three types of switch

-   **Linear:** The force required to actuate the switch is consistent
    from the top to the bottom. These switches are marketed for gamers
    or office use. They tend to be on the quiet side and are easy to
    work with when typing common keys repeatedly (what gamers have to
    do frequently).

-   **Tactile:** There is a noticeable pressure point after which the
    key press registers. This "bump" can make it easier to notice a
    key press. Depending on the person's typing habits, such feedback
    is important to avoid misfiring keys and be more accurate as a
    result.

-   **Clicky:** Much like the tactile switches, these have a
    noticeable bump, but they also provide audible feedback. The exact
    sound profile depends on a number of factors, from the keycaps, to
    the materials below the switch and the keyboard, though these
    switches will always be on the noisier side of the spectrum. Some
    find the clicky sound pleasant to work with while othesr may
    consider it distracting at worst or a gimmick at best.

# Switches are colour-coded

There is a plethora of switches differentiated by the aforementioned
types but also by the speicific properties of their force curve .
Perhaps the most common ones are red (linear), brown (tactile), and
blue (clicky). People with no prior experience should consider one of
these before experimenting with more specialised options.

# Mind the curve

Suppliers provide graphs that show how much pressure is required to
register a key press, as well as other characteristics of the switch.
Beginners will not have a point of reference: they best opt for
whichever is the default for the type of switch they are expecting to
like the most.

Those curves are informative, though one does not need to be an
engineer to make an informed decision. Plain terms such as "silent and
tactile" will still give a good idea of what the switch is about.

# Consider the noise factor

As noted above, the clicky switches will produce audible feedback.
Though the other types are not completely silent. There exist switches
which are designed specifically with that goal in mind, but the
average mechanical switch still produces more noise than, say, a
laptop's keyboard.

Keyboard enthusiasts go to great lengths to get the exact sound
profile they like, which usually involves changes to the keyboard and
desk setup.

If one really cares about being silent, they must search for switches
that are marketed as such and must further check for community
resources on the matter to form an opinion. Plus there is the option
of applying lube to the switches and other such postmarket
modifications.

# Where to start

A tactile switch provides that "mechanical" feel without deviating too
much from mainstream keyboards. Linear switches might be too "boring"
for newcomers, as they feel like what everyone is already used to
(which is perfectly fine in its own right, though may not kindle that
excitement to further explore mechanical keyboards). Clicky switches
add that typewriter-esque feeling, which some may like, though they
probably are too noisy and disturbing for people around the typist.
