---
title: "MT3 keycap profile impressions"
excerpt: "I tried the MT3 keycaps with my Iris keyboard. These are my impressions."
---

I spent the past two weeks using the MT3 profile by Drop+Matt3o on my
Iris keyboard. Overall, I liked the build quality but realised MT3 was
not for me.

[ I am not posting links to any of the mentioned items because I am
  not affiliated with anybody and want this to be clear. ]

## The profile

MT3 is a tall, sculpted design, with spherical tops. I had never used
anything like it and was interested to experience this new sensation.
The deep dishes at the top give the feeling that your fingers are
hugged by the caps. You get a clear tactile feedback when you are
hitting the centre of the key. Depending on how accurate your typing
is, this will feel inviting and you will enjoy typing for longer.

Unless your previous caps were also tall, a switch to MT3 will require
further changes to your keyboard/office setup. In my case, I am
tenting the Iris (using regular bolts) and I thus had to tinker with
the exact angle: I lowered it a little bit.

## Build quality

The set I got is black-on-white. It is made out of thick ABS material.
One of the early impressions I had when I got started with mechanical
keyboards is that ABS is inherently lower quality than PBT. This is
simply not true, as the production process makes all the difference.
MT3 is nicely done on this front. Its walls are thick and the texture
is pleasant to the touch.

The legends on the caps are produced using the double-shot technique.
This means that the cap consists of two separate pieces of plastic
pieced together: first the legend is cast and then the rest of the
housing is filled around it. These double-shot keycaps look much
better to me than the dye-sublimated Cherry Icebergo set I got with my
Iris out-of-the-box (those are fine in their own right, but the
legends do not appeal to me).

I do not look at the keys and do not take my keyboard to any
exhibition, so this is not a major point for me. I am mentioning it
though as I am aware that it matters to a lot of people. If anything,
it changes the looks of the board. Based on what I have seen here, I
have developed a preference for double-shot over dye-sublimated caps,
though I remain open-minded.

## Acoustics

The combination of height and thickness makes MT3 produce a deep, base
sound. I find it pleasant to work with. It combines nicely with my
silent, tactile key switches (now using the Durock Shrimps that were
shipped with the Iris).

Of course, the acoustics are not limited to keycaps. One must consider
the specifics of their keyboard, the possible presence of sound
dampeners, the properties of the desk's material, etc. Ceteris
paribus, then, I prefer MT3 over the Cherry Icebergo set: it sounds
sturdier.

## Too idosyncratic for me

Despite its high build quality and excellent acoustics, I cannot get
used to the height and shape of MT3. The deep dishes at the top do not
work well with the way I type, as I now realise that I do not hit all
keys exactly at the centre. This is especially problematic for the
thumb cluster, where I want to type the innermost and outermost keys
without twisting or stretching my thumb.

With MT3, I got sloppier with my typing and would frequently mishit a
modifier such that it would not register as a key press. I have
configured the QMK firmware with one-shot modifiers, meaning that I
tap the modifier and then within a limited amount of time the next key
will count as if I was holding down the modifier all along. This is
essential for my workflow, as I do not tire my fingers after a long
typing session.

As a result of this sloppiness, I lost confidence in the tactility of
my setup. I had to apply more force to each key press than what the
underlying mechanical switches would require. In my current state,
this is a major downside as I am still recovering from my
keyboard-induced arm/wrist injury. I need keys that are easy to reach,
actuate without much effort, and can work reliably even when pressed
at a slight angle.

I suspect a lighter, linear switch with less pre-travel will solve the
problem with the thumb cluster. Basically, a slight touch will
register a key press. Though such a tweak will inevitably introduce
another problem: I will accidentally actuate keys just by trying to
rest my fingers on the home row which will, either make me sloppy
again or force me to change how I rest my hands between typing sprees.

A mixed set of switches may be an optimal arrangement to accommodate
MT3, though I am concerned that the lack of uniform tactile feedback
will require more cognitive effort to maintain momentum.

In other words, I am not going to try super smooth linear switches
just to circumvent my issues with MT3.

Here is something I learnt in the process: trying a cap in isolation
does not provide enough information about how the in vivo typing
experience will turn out to be. Well, unless you are already highly
experienced... If anything, testing it in a vacuum gives the wrong
impression, as you will likely focus more on the acoustics and build
quality than on whether the set is actually comfortable to use.

I cannot tell if height alone is an issue or if it is that in tandem
with the deep dishes that unsettles me. Perhaps it is the latter, so I
am not willing to give up on tall profiles altogether. I can, however,
confirm that I dislike the pronounced spherical tops. A more gentle
curve to that sphere may be fine, but not those scoops. It is as if I
am constantly reminded that "this is MT3 you are using", whereas I
want something more neutral to get the job done but otherwise remain
in the periphery of my conscious efforts.

Another area where MT3 is idiosyncratic is with how its homing keys
are designed. Instead of those little bumps, they have a deeper dish.
Perhaps this is only a matter of getting used to, though I could not
and would lose sense of my F and J keys after a while.

I believe I spent enough time with this set to know that I gave it a
fair chance. I think Drop and Matt3o have done a wonderful job with
the build quality and I will happily try another product from them. My
distaste for MT3 comes down to its shape: it has to do with how I am
used to typing and what my priorities are right now, given my injury.

Perhaps you will love this profile the same way lots of other people
do. I believe it is too opinionated and is thus more likely to evoke
feelings that are closer to outright approval/disapproval than
indifference.

For the time being, I am using Cherry Icebergo. I have also used the
OEM profile, which I marginally prefer over Cherry because it is a bit
taller and less aggressively sculpted. The reason I do not use my OEM
caps is that they are low quality both in terms of touch and
acoustics. Whereas the Cherry Icebergo set is a thick, single-shot PBT
that feels pleasant and easy to operate. If it had the double-shot
legends of MT3 and a sound profile similar to that, it would be a top
tier set.
