---
title: "Why you are not important"
subtitle: "On escapism, egocentrism, and the sense of self in interconnectedness"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about escapism, egocentrism, and the sense of self  in interconnectedness."
---

**A.:** Good morning!

**B.:** Hello there!

**A.:** I thought I was the only early bird around...

**B.:** Is this your regular waking hour?

**A.:** Yes.  I got out of bed at half past six.  Basically just in time
for breakfast.  And you?

**B.:** Maybe at quarter to five.  Went to the beach for a swim.  Then
walked around the area.  It struck me how familiar everything felt, even
though this is my first time around here.

**A.:** You have certainly seen something like it before.  We are the
same country after all.

**B.:** So close, yet so far apart.  It is sad.  Soldiers ready to kill
each other for arbitrary lines on a map in defence of some ruling
elite's interests, ideologies indoctrinating us into hating each other,
pomp and circumstance obscuring manufactured histories and the absurdity
of it all.  What are those elaborate constructs of humankind but vanity
gone wrong?  Vanity rationalised as necessity and wrapped up in a
discourse of pragmatism.

**A.:** I feel you.  It is why we are here, after all, hoping to
establish relationships that can help bridge the gap.  I found the whole
idea intriguing: to bring together bloggers and activists from the
region.

**B.:** We hope for the best, though I feel that ten years from now all
this will be but a distant memory or, perhaps, an inspiration for future
writers.

**A.:** Time will tell.  I hope we succeed, despite the daunting task.
Do you mind though if we stop talking about politics?  We don't have
that much time and I would prefer to know more about you: your
interests, your background.  We will get the chance to elaborate on the
political aspects later in the workshops and during the remainder of our
stay at this hotel.

**B.:** Speak your mind.

**A.:** Let's start with the information we have already.  Is there any
particular reason you went to the beach so early?

**B.:** It is summer time.  Beaches are always packed with people.  The
only way to avoid them is to either go late at night or at dawn.  Else
you wait for winter.

**A.:** Why eschew people to begin with?

**B.:** I would turn it around as not having a pressing need to be with
others the whole time and seizing the moment to be reminded of our place
in the world.  Why crave the attention, the validation?  Our intuition,
what our immediate experience conditions us to believe, is that we are
the protagonists in our life and the makers of its story.  Everything
revolves around us.  It thus is easy to be misled by the subjectivity of
impressions into developing an overarching egocentrism and, eventually,
extending it to a collective mindset of anthropocentrism.  When we seek
people in situations we do not really need them to be in, it may be that
we are ultimately craving for stimuli that reinforce the illusion of
self-centredness.  Did they see me?  What are they thinking about me
right now?  Such preoccupations spring from that point of view.  We want
to cling on to the belief of playing the protagonist because we are
afraid of the truth it conceals: our impermanence, as well as our
insignificance in the grand scheme of things.  We dread it.  Unless we
learn to live with our fears, normalise them, and eventually overcome
them.  The appearance of loneliness reminds us of our actual condition:
we are not the centre of the universe and we are not responsible for
everything that happens in our life, even within the scope of our
subjectivity.  When a person is on their own, they begin to understand
how their actuality compares to their socially-constructed self.  No
matter one's status among their peers, once they step outside that zone
they are framed differently.

**A.:** Hmm, I was not expecting that.  You will have to elaborate
anyway.  My guess was that you had some kind of social anxiety.  Perhaps
body image issues, which would explain the behaviour of hiding from the
public eye.

**B.:** Those are pertinent considerations in their own right, though
they do not apply in my case.  I could go to the beach at noon, but I
prefer not to.  It is about finding a balance in life between our nature
as social animals in our own constructed world and species that exist
within and because of a wider system of factors.  Too much sociability
may feed into that sense of inflated significance one has within their
particular social milieu.  On the other hand, absolute loneliness
deprives us of engrossing and fulfilling experiences.  Think, for
example, what true solitude would do to a person if they could not even
listen to music, or generally have access to anything that is of human
design or origin.  The process of enjoying art, of being exposed to
culture in general, makes manifest an intersubjective phenomenon, even
though there may be no interpersonal directness or reciprocity involved.
Through the cultural artefact one experiences a subjectivity, hence the
intersubjective reality of the moment.  As social animals we fulfil our
potential via immediate association with others at the physical and
emotional levels, such as with an embrace, a kiss, or through
friendship, etc., but also broaden our horizons with the intellectual or
aesthetic works of others.  The categories of the physical, the
emotional, the intellectual, the aesthetic, and the mystical are
analytical constructs.  In practice, they are bound up together as
aspects of the same presence.

**A.:** So the human being is a complex, multifaceted entity that is
connected to their environment.  And this environment encompasses other
such beings.

**B.:** I would just add a fine distinction: we are not "connected" to
our environment.  We are yet another factor in the system which we
subjectively understand as environing us.  Every presence has its
environment as seen from its own subjectivity, yet every said presence
also exists as environment, or part thereof to be precise, in the
perspective of another.  It is why I hold that the agency-structure
divide must collapse in to itself when studying human affairs where
agents---other people in their own subjectivity---can operate as
structure in those cases where their actions reproduce the structural
aspects of their collective order.

**A.:** I see.  Then...

**B.:** Sorry to interrupt, but this is important to add.

**A.:** Please, go ahead.

**B.:** There is this distinction between the internal and the external
worlds.  In essence, it too is analytical, for we cannot have whatever
is deemed as internal on its own.  We can discern it as a pattern, or a
system, or a system of systems with its own local rules or strata of
ever more particularised rules, but we cannot sever it from the
magnitudes that render it possible.  Put simply, it is impossible to
have a human enveloped in a capsule of nothingness, affected,
determined, or otherwise influenced by nothing, yet remain human in the
way we know it.  Even the expression of being environed by nothing is
meaningless!  And I actually believe that existence as such is
impossible from nothing, in nothing, towards nothing.  There is always
something.  We cannot even conceive of nothingness as such, but only
outline it in negative terms as the opposite of presence.  The moment we
describe nothingness, we render it present and, thus, non-nothingness.
So when we contemplate an object in its environment, we are actually
elaborating on an analytical distinction that rests on subjectivity.

[ Read: [On non-Being and the prime
mover](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-04-03-nonbeing-prime-mover/)
(2021-04-03) ]

**A.:** Fascinating!  Tell me more about the beach then.  Do you
exercise?  How good is your athletic performance?

**B.:** I do exercise a bit using just my body weight.  Nothing extreme
though.  No obsession with it.  You speak of performance, which I
interpret as referring to a competition of sorts.  When you try to
become a champion, you make sacrifices in pursuit of an end.  You do not
think about the consequences, as you obstinately seek to bask in the
ephemeral satisfaction---the glory---that the championship provides.
Sport can become an addiction, as with everything that is not done in
moderation: it is exhilarating, you live for it, you dream about it.  So
if you are, say, a footballer (soccer player) you are forgoing the
longer-term health of your legs' joints, among others, in order to
compete for some trophies over the span of an otherwise short
professional career as a sportsperson.  To me, glory is fundamentally
the same as seeking attention.  You become an avatar in the public eye
as you the person is reduced to the figment of you the celebrated
performer.  I do not measure my performance nor try to out-compete
anyone because that is not the point of being athletic.

**A.:** What is the point then?

**B.:** To enjoy a better quality of life than what you would have had
without any degree of physical activity.  I suppose you are already
familiar with the implications on the likelihood and severity of chronic
diseases, but think about experiences in everyday life.  You want to
take a stroll down the park, walk up a staircase, go swimming, travel
and explore sites where you will likely have to climb some elevation,
dance, and so on.  If it is within your means, you want those
experiences to require as little effort as possible.  They need not
become an ordeal.

**A.:** What about those who cannot commit to sport?

**B.:** They must be treated with respect and concerted efforts have to
be made to accommodate their needs while improving their lives through
other means.  Me being athletic should not be misconstrued as an
exhortation for everyone to follow in my footsteps.  Each person is
unique and must operate accordingly.

**A.:** All clear!  I confess to be hungry and not at my best right now.
It still is seven o'clock, after all!  Don't know where you are getting
all that energy from.

**B.:** That's fine.  I got carried away.  An early swim can do that
sometimes.

**A.:** I have taken mental notes of what you just said.  I think I got
the gist of it, but we'll need to revisit some finer points.  I also
wish to add my own thoughts to the discussion.  Let's check the buffet
and afterwards head to our first workshop.  We'll have plenty of free
time in the evening, probably at dinner and for the rest of the night.

[ In the interest of time... ]

**A.:** May I take a seat?

**B.:** Please!

**A.:** I noticed you sitting here by yourself and thought I would join
you.  My room overlooks the swimming pool.  Right there.  Normally I
dine at around 20h, but an hour ahead of schedule should make no major
difference.

**B.:** The others said they would dine at around eight as well.  I am
just used to my ways.  Besides, I like my meals to be as unceremonious
as possible, the food bland, austere, forgettable, the whole process
short and to-the-point.  A meal that you keep thinking about is a bad
meal: it distracts you.  Trying to coordinate a meeting with ten people
and cater to everyone's tastes just turns an ordinary event into a
special occasion.

**A.:** I think I know you already. "We can always socialise
afterwards."  Correct?

**B.:** ...

**A.:** I take that grin as confirmation.  I have been thinking about
the topics you covered at the breakfast table.  As I mentioned earlier
in my introduction to the group, I am studying psychology.  Will be a
sophomore this term, but am still advanced enough in what I do.

**B.:** I remember.

**A.:** You said something along the lines of everything being
connected.  Like how there cannot be a human in nothingness and so on.
And how agency and structure are not different in certain cases.  This
got me thinking about my studies and specifically the notion of
escapism.  Are you familiar with this term?

**B.:** Yes, but it would be better to elaborate on your thesis.

**A.:** Basically I wanted to discuss this concept of getting away from
an environment you do not like.  Is it possible and what can we learn
from such tendencies?

**B.:** Earlier I was speaking in general terms.  What we would consider
metaphysics or, if you will, the abstract structure of all that is.
When I claimed that we cannot have an object without an environment, I
did not mean to imply that it is impossible for particular cases to be
reconfigured.  In plain terms, it is possible for a given human being to
switch from one social milieu to another, such as by migrating.  What is
not possible, I contend, is for there to be existence in nothing, a
presence without environment.  So, in our example of the immigrant, they
can move from one cultural context to another, but they cannot avoid
being environed by something, perhaps another culture.

**A.:** Do you think escapism is a valid feeling?

**B.:** I believe this question needs to be reformulated.  Just try to
imagine an invalid feeling.  The emotion itself takes place.  What may
be up for debate is whether its underlying triggers or expectations and
desires satisfy the principle of correspondence when assessed against
the actuality of the case.  For instance, a narcissist who arrives here
at nine o'clock, may feel ignored by the rest of the group and harbour a
feeling of indignation when, in truth, it was known that everyone
preferred to have dinner at eight.

**A.:** The feeling occurs, then.  We need to test how justifiable it
is, where that makes sense.

**B.:** Validation in general is a tricky concept for feelings.  This
relates to what I said in the morning about going for a swim when no-one
is at the beach.  If you feel a certain way, you do not need a stamp of
approval from others to add credibility to the emotion.  They do not
hold the authoritative view nor do they activate the chain reaction the
feeling causes.  Insofar as the emotion as such is concerned, the
opinions of others are irrelevant.  It is why I arrived for dinner at
seven: what our group thinks is not my problem.  If, however, it is
their attention that you ultimately seek, then your actions have some
ulterior motive.  We would need to identify the triggers of those
behavioural patterns and study the emotions related to them.  Still,
this is not matter of the flawed concept of "valid feelings".  They are
all valid.  We need a more refined approach than such binaries.

**A.:** I have been thinking about escapism as a means of
experimentation.  It can help set aside your current condition to seek
experiences that are not possible in your ordinary life.

**B.:** There's a contradiction there.  Isn't escapism possible within
your ordinary life?  And, by extension, isn't the derived experience
possible as well?  Again, my point is nuanced, as I get what you are
saying, where escapism is a virtual escape from a physical situation,
but I think we should not neglect the potentiality of any given case.
For there to be escapism, there has to be a potential for escapism.  The
case must render it possible.

**A.:** Can you point at something specific?

**B.:** Would you agree that video games are considered at least by some
as a form of escapism?

**A.:** Yes.

**B.:** Now suppose we invert the roles.  Say that your ordinary life is
that which unfolds within the game world.  Can your avatar in the game
seek out escapism or otherwise alternative experiences?

**A.:** I think not.  That would have to be programmed into the game.
Plus, there are some genres where that scenario cannot be formulated,
such as puzzle games.  Though I guess this is the same principle of
being programmed to do something.

**B.:** Exactly!  More generally, that plane of reality would have to
hold the potential for such a state of affairs.

**A.:** And we can apply this insight to games as such.  Like you can
only ever do what the game permits, whether by its developers'
intentions or not.  Including the bugs, of course.  Those too are part
of that plane of reality you mentioned.

**B.:** It is the same with all experiences.  An agent of action can
only seek those which are possible in the given structure.  Agency is a
function of structure, yet the latter consists of other agents of
action.  What I implied earlier by the impossibility of a
decontextualised presence.  Everything is contextualised, framed,
informed, conditioned, determined by other factors.  And because an
agent is a factor in the perspective of others, the interplay of factors
is neither linear nor one-directional: it is cyclical and dynamic, else
helix-like (spiral).  Dependence is inter-dependence, existence is
co-existence, unless we are explicitly conducting analytics where we
mentally isolate certain factors.  Furthermore, there are feedback
loops, which rest on a medium of communication that conveys meaning.  It
is a foundational language that ties everything together.  To your
specific point though, games are a great metaphor of the predicament we
find ourselves in.  We are expected to operate in certain ways and
fulfil particular roles.  To be predictable much like the automata in
the game world.  While our socially-constructed life cannot reprogram
the natural order, it tries its best to push it to the side.

**A.:** This only raises more questions though.

**B.:** It always does.  It is what I do.  We'll get to them, but let me
press on that last point.  Listen to this song and I will explain why I
dislike it.

**A.:** What?  You don't like Frank Sinatra?

**B.:** The singer and the genre are fine.  It is the underlying value
system of the specific lyrics that annoys me (_Luck Be A Lady_ is the
song).  How "lady luck" should behave "lady-like".  In the background
lies the chimera of the American dream, while what comes through is the
nouveau riche pretentiousness as well as the insecure and possessive
gentleman.  Hypocrisy, hypocrisy writ large.  Those too are mini-games
of sorts where people have to conform with what their role
substantiates.  The so-called "lady" must be lady-like because rules,
unwritten or otherwise, dictate thus.  Again, what I mentioned earlier
about trying to maintain a parallel world that we can reprogram on a
whim.  To allow the person which qualifies as a lady to behave in an
altogether different manner without the risk of persecution, we need to
rewrite the game's algorithm, which means to re-institute society.
Still, we know that to institute is to enact rules and those are always
creating new roles.  Much like a game must be the product of some code
which determines what is possible within it.  There can be no game
without prior programming, just as there can be no future society whose
values have not been prefigured by its predecessor.

[ Read: [Notes on
Rules](https://protesilaos.com/books/2020-07-01-notes-on-rules/)
(2020-07-01) ]

**A.:** This adds another perspective to escapism.  Plus, it provides
grist to the mill of my curiosity!  Many I have conversed with typically
think of escapism as something bad, deplorable, undesirable or, at
least, dismiss it as an experience that is not part of reality.  What do
you think about that?

**B.:** The notion of "reality" is problematic in this context.  It
rests on a tenuous distinction that reduces nature to an idealisation of
nature.  I have explained before how humanity has a tendency to idolise
and to exercise idolatry.  This is done by associating a presence with
an idealised version of it, only to eventually conflate the two.

[ Read: [Why it is not just about
you](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-08-03-idealise-idolise-hubris/)
(2021-08-03) ]

**A.:** Please elaborate, as I do not follow.

**B.:** In this case, the idol of nature does not encompass imagination.
The capacity to imagine is part of being a human.  Remember that all
potentiality is contingent on the structure.  So if we hold that nature
exists and all which exists is real, then it follows that imagination as
such exists and is part of this reality as well.

**A.:** Isn't that a problematic conclusion though?  Would it not make
it impossible to tell what is sheer fantasy and what is not?

**B.:** It is a fine point.  Only if you are conditioned to think of
nature as an idol of itself.  Consider it this way and connect it to
what we covered earlier on the topic of valid feelings.  If someone
hurls a stone that hits another person, the latter will feel pain.  The
injury is the effect and the cause is the impact of the flying object on
the person's body.  We could trace the cause further back and also
reason about contributing causes, but let's keep it simple.  We are
inclined to claim that such event is real.  We can touch the stone.  It
travelled through space over a certain time.  There was an impact on
another tangible surface.  A discernible sense of pain followed.  Now
suppose that someone thinks of their deceased pet.  They may feel
happiness, sadness, or a mixture of other emotions.  Here we have a
memory as the cause, with the effects being those feelings.  This too is
real because the emotions are, in practice, a series of biochemical
reactions, much like the infliction of physical harm.  If the effects
are real, the cause must be the same.  In a third case, we may have
someone who imagines the world in a certain state of affairs and is
shocked about how things may play out.  Again, an idea has physical
consequences.  Ideas are intangible, but they too exist
somewhere---where exactly is beside the point.  And we can extend this
insight to every aspect of the imaginary.  Whether the whole process
starts endogenously or exogenously is a secondary consideration as it
does not change how "real" it is.  The gist is that imagination and its
products are part of the potential of this plane of reality and, in this
particular sense, are not distinct from what qualifies as empirical
evidence.  We can still disambiguate the two magnitudes by employing
heuristics and by holding certain parameters as constant.  It is what I
mentioned earlier about the analytical distinction between internal and
external worlds.

[ Read: [On materiality and
emergence](https://protesilaos.com/books/2020-12-20-emergence-materiality/)
(2020-12-20) ]

[ Read: [Notes on Science and
Scientism](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-04-28-notes-science-scientism/)
(2021-04-28) ]

**A.:** What gives escapism its negative connotations?

**B.:** Expectations.  Take the objectified lady that Sinatra sings
about.  She---or should we say "it" as the role of ladylikeness bestowed
upon her dehumanises her, reducing her into an object controlled by a
conceptual straitjacket?---has to behave in a certain way, even though
she may not feel like it.  So she has to wear make-up and dress
accordingly to be cute at all times even though she may prefer to remain
simple and, say, forage herbs and study the local fauna of the nearby
mountains.  Thus a lady who does not behave in a lady-like fashion is
derided or discriminated against for her 'escapism', for her preference
to lead her own life free from desires that are not hers.  Escapism in
the way you implied it earlier as experimentation can help us relieve
some pressure from oppressive circumstances that we cannot physically
undo.  To find refuge in a virtual place we can trust.  The mark of a
tyranny at the quotidian social level, not just the political regime, is
when people react negatively to you feeling good about yourself and them
wanting to control how you should act and what emotions you ought to
experience.

**A.:** So escapism can be therapeutic in the way I had implied it, even
though it may not be sufficient in its own right---that is another
discussion though.  Also, now I understand that my question this morning
about why you went to the beach at the crack of dawn was insensitive.
Sorry!

**B.:** There is no need to apologise.  Sincere ignorance is not a crime
in my books.  It should provide the impetus to educate and to redeem
those who do not know, not hunt them down with extreme prejudice.  The
ones who treat such ignorance as a mortal sin and take offence at your
slightest misstep are acting in bad faith and are ready to pick a fight
for ulterior reasons.  Humanity has time and again created injustice on
a monumental scale in pursuit of what appeared to be a just cause.  What
I find problematic at the outset is dissonance: you know exactly how
things stand yet opt to operate as an ignoramus regardless, while having
the temerity to be vociferous in disseminating your uninformed views.

**A.:** A subtle but important distinction.  Why do people have all
those expectations then?  Like wanting someone to behave in a certain
way or whatnot?

**B.:** I would speculate that it stems from the inclination to avoid
unpredictability.  Uncertainty disturbs us and drives us to reach early
conclusions through which we entertain the illusion that we know more
than we actually do.  The untrained mind wants to treat everything as
having a definitive beginning, middle, and end.  It will go to great
lengths to provide answers to unanswerable questions and it will cling
on to the impression of certitude those engender.  To hypothesise is
different though, because it remains open-ended and subject to review.

**A.:** How does that translate into daily life?

**B.:** Think about the saying of "the evil you know is better than the
one you don't".  It still is an evil throughout though your familiarity
with it offers you, in a somewhat paradoxical way, some sense of
comfort; comfort in what to expect.

**A.:** You are saying then that if given the option humans may prefer a
bad situation they are familiar with over one they cannot predict?  This
obviously goes beyond the phrase you referenced.

**B.:** Humans enact rules that govern their collective experience in an
effort to establish a modicum of predictability.  There is,
nevertheless, a fine line between working towards a basis that makes
social life function smoothly and becoming outright intolerant of any
tendency that upsets the norms.  As with our example of "lady luck"
being expected to act all "lady-like", whatever that means, there is a
point at which the belief in perfect predictability in one's behaviour
inevitably results in denial of their personhood; and personhood entails
the capacity to act, which implies the possibility of acting in a manner
that upsets expectations altogether.  While it is understandable that
all societies have rules, the difference between benign practicality and
pernicious absolutism is one of degree.  Much like the distinction
between poison and medicine where a tiny portion will heal you while an
overdose shall prove lethal---or what I do with a bit of sport instead
of being obsessed with it.  Moderation is key.  Every culture, including
those which fashion themselves as enlightened, comes with the latent
risk of mistaking its rules, its own institutions and conventions, for
natural constants.  Such falsehoods underpin attempts at stamping out
any deviations from the norm as unnatural or otherwise undesirable.

**A.:** Basically you are saying that there needs to be a balance and
people must remain vigilant.  How does one go about finding that
sweetspot?

**B.:** I don't think there is a way to answer this in advance or,
rather, to know what the balance is in a case yet-to-be-constituted.  If
you do not have the factors of the case, how can you opine about their
interplay and draw the indelible lines of the categorisation you are
about to make?  It is why the real value of thinking things through is
not about the answers you give but the attitude you maintain.  The right
answer may change---it always does.  What will allow you to arrive at it
consistently and to adapt to evolving circumstances is a certain
disposition towards knowledge and learning.

[ Read: [Why I won't compete with
you](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-06-20-no-competition-with-you/)
(2021-06-20) ]

[ Read: [The Dialectician's
Ethos](https://protesilaos.com/books/2020-09-30-ethos-dialectic/)
(2020-09-30) ]

**A.:** Would you call it "wisdom"?

**B.:** Perhaps that's the word for it.  While a simple definition of
wisdom may be that it consists in the capacity to make the correct
judgement under the prevailing conditions, I like to think of it
slightly differently.  Wisdom is the ability to determine when to upset
one's own justifiable precepts and why.  It is what distinguishes the
grand master from the disciple.  The latter will be dogmatic as they
faithfully follow every rule to the letter.  While the former will
understand how to apply the rules or refrain from doing so.  There is no
dogmatism, just an understanding of what is in effect and the reason
behind it.  This still is about the correct judgement call, though a bit
more elaborate.

**A.:** I see.  We've ventured too far from our topic though.  How would
you tie this in to the theme of escapism?

**B.:** We spoke about the uneasiness caused by uncertainty and how
humans will explore ways to distract themselves from their actuality as
ignorant, as not omniscient.  There is a sense in which our theories
about us and the world at-large, our conduct in general and the
concomitant aspirations, are themselves a form of escapism as we try to
avoid the inconvenient truth that we do not really know as much as we
think we do.

**A.:** Is that bad then?  Can we reach a state where we do not try to
avoid our condition?

**B.:** What matters is that this plane of reality has the potential for
escapism.  Whether we can avoid it or not is also within the horizon of
possibilities.  We might or we might not.  Those who can are the ones
who are at ease with the radical uncertainty of our condition, those who
do not dread it and need not flee from it, those who are not disturbed
by the truth of our impermanence and the fact that our presence consists
as partiality, not individuality in the strict sense of a
decontextualised presence.

[ Read: [On individuality and
partiality](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-03-14-individuality-partiality/)
(2021-03-14) ]

**A.:** On a side note, it is fascinating how this all started by
discussing the otherwise mundane task of you going to the beach at a
certain time.

**B.:** You will know intuitively when you have made progress once you
can learn about the greater things through the seemingly little ones.

**A.:** Sounds cryptic.  "Progress" in what sense?

**B.:** To answer that I need to re-frame the issue.  I mentioned
earlier how briefly avoiding public scrutiny can help you train to
overcome your egocentrism.  It will make you understand that you are not
the author of your life, as having exclusivity over it but, at best, a
contributor to its sprawling narrative.

**A.:** Yes, I remember.

**B.:** When you reach that state of consciousness, when you admit that
you are but a part of a greater system, you are humbled by the
recognition that what you can do is not really of your own making.  You
are endowed with certain talents, physical characteristics, personality
traits that were not of your own choosing or design.  You are
predisposed to pursue certain fields of endeavour.  You are exposed to a
social-cultural milieu that conditions the way you think before you even
begin to develop faculties of independent reasoning.  That civilisation
furnishes artefacts which enrich your life by broadening your horizons,
such as language, music, science, technology, the content of everyday
conversations, etc.  It is a vast corpus of work and/or knowledge
developed incrementally by innumerable contributors over the ages.  You
both build on the works of others and are inspired by what is available
in your environment.  It happens regardless of whether you realise it or
not, want it or not.  There is, in other words, a structure that
conditions your agency.

**A.:** What about making progress towards learning about the greater
things through the smaller ones?

**B.:** The egocentric agent fails to recognise the fact that their
output is contingent on the structure or, to put it simply, they are
deluded into thinking that their works are exclusively their own.  Hence
their insatiable desire for confirmation.  Whereas the one who is free
from such misconceptions is prepared to give back what they have taken
and to add their own contribution to the commons which continuously
enrich their life.  Maybe you are familiar with Homer's _Odyssey_.  The
poet starts by appealing to the Muse, the goddess of poetry in this
case, to tell him what to write.  While this is an artistic and theistic
metaphor, it does hint at a profound insight: that even a masterpiece
has no exclusive author in the strict individualistic sense that an
egocentrist would think of their fruits of labour.  Progress then, of
the sort I alluded to, is the process of growing out of one's
egocentrism.

**A.:** Thank you for the detailed explanation!

**B.:** You are welcome!  But wait cause there's more.

**A.:** Of course...  Just like that swim which has nothing to do with
swimming.

**B.:** Myth has it that Prometheus, a titan or else a god, taught
humanity the art of handling fire.  This is not literally about
pyrotechnics, but an allegory of someone who shares vital know-how which
then forever broadens the possibilities of those who get to implement
it.  I am simplifying the story for the sake of brevity.  To this day we
use fire, both literally and metaphorically, to drive our vehicles,
power up our houses, use computers, prepare food, and so on.  Such
critical know-how is a common resource because a higher being shared it
with the world rather than keep it exclusive to the domain of some
elite.  Couldn't Prometheus---or every one who follows the example of
the titan by being guided by the "Promethean Ideal", as I would call
it---license their work instead and live off of it as a rentier, much
like the modern world's unscrupulous overlords who connive to enclose
the commons?  No, because a higher being knows that they too are not the
centre of the world and that they too are part of a greater whole.  What
the myth teaches those who listen and what Homer tells us at the outset
of the epic is that despite our subjectivity and the immediate sense of
egocentrism that we have, we must aspire to expand our shared stock of
knowledge rather than extract from it; aspire to empower others just
like they have empowered or are empowering us; aspire to be more
god-like in our disposition by overcoming our ego.

**A.:** Are you religious?

**B.:** No.

**A.:** Why not?

**B.:** The immediate answer to such questions is their inversion,
namely, why are you---not you in particular but the person who makes the
positive proposition---religious?  What does that give you?  For
example, are you a Christian because it teaches love at some level?
Then would you hold that one cannot express love without being a
Christian?  Is religiosity of that particular sort a prerequisite to
loving?  And if it is, how can love exist without religious beliefs,
such as how does your dog or a child that hasn't been indoctrinated yet
love you?  There is no need to answer those questions.  I am just being
schematic.  We could ask the same for the community aspect of religions,
such as attending church on Sundays in hope of getting a date or gaining
the favourable opinion of your peers in pursuit of some other benefit.
My point is that all positive propositions, which is to say every thesis
that states how things finally stand, must ultimately be justified.  The
burden of proof falls on those who want to make such claims.  We, on the
other end, maintain the option to provide counter-arguments in an
attempt to probe further, else to approximate the truth, if we feel like
it.  And in doing so, we may simply disagree with what is presented to
us on the premise that it does not make up a cogent argument.

**A.:** Let's suppose that I answer those questions.  What would you say
then?

**B.:** There are matters which are open to interpretation and thus
contingent on subjectivity, and those which are not.  If, for example,
humanity unanimously decides that it no longer wishes to be bound by
gravity and, say, codifies such a belief in law it will have no effect
on its condition: the Earth will still pull it to the ground, ceteris
paribus.  Whereas humanity can decide on what it means for a person to
behave in a "lady-like" fashion, if I may re-use my previous example:
there is no objective or convention-independent condition at play or, if
there is, it is too obscure for us to grasp it with certainty, hence the
differences in opinion.

**A.:** And how does that relate to the question of being religious?

**B.:** An impartial observer will discover that the practice of
religiosity is replete with diverging views and traditions.  There are
numerous religions and even more branches or sects within them.  In
light of this evidence, the impartial observer can only state the
agnostic or sceptical view, that of not knowing for sure: the apparent
controversies reveal the obscurity of the underlying theme and the
futility of trying and failing to provide definitive answers.  Those
involved in the theological debates are not sure about the underlying
theme though they like to pretend otherwise.  Both extremes of theists
and atheists, both aspects of the same coin of certitude.  Consequently,
if you were to explore these topics, I would consider it valid to not
only elaborate on the substantive aspects of your statements but also
include aesthetic considerations.

**A.:** Aesthetics?  How?

**B.:** One who suggests that they like---"like" is the operative
term---belonging or not to this or that denomination holds a fecund
approach, as it hints at the underlying subjectivity of the matter: it
is not pretentious.  This is not to say that we ought not to believe in
something or that religion as such is superfluous, but rather that we
should recognise that ours is a belief, some conventional arrangement,
which implies that we might be wrong.  It is the unwillingness to remain
dubitative and inquisitive which sustains the existential escapism of
claiming to know what we do not.

**A.:** Piecing together dubitativeness and the inclination to avoid
unpredictability that you speculated about, can we maintain that the two
are one and the same?  That we are curious at some deeper level because
knowledge or the appearance of knowledge makes us feel better?

**B.:** That could be the case.  Though I would differentiate them at
the level of their application or else their modalities.  It is the same
as how a shepherd must work with the prey drive of their puppy to train
it for the rigours of herding sheep.  Herding and hunting derive from
the same place.  Their application differs.  A puppy with no pronounced
pray drive cannot grow into a shepherd dog.  A human who is gripped by
the dread of their unpredictable condition, who is readily aware of it,
is at the same time one who has the potential to use their propensities
in ways that can liberate them from their agony.  It all starts by
exposing oneself to experiences that reveal one's insignificance,
through which comes the realisation that egocentrism is an illusion that
holds us hostage to our fears.

**A.:** How do you go about achieving that?  Do you just wake up one day
and decide to stop doing things the way you used to?

**B.:** It depends on the person and the circumstances.  In my case, I
left my hometown to pursue university studies.  My naive and misinformed
plan at the time was that I would go abroad, perform some otherwise
boring tasks, and eventually come back to my prior state as if nothing
had transpired.  It turned out that life had other events in store,
which led me to migrate and roam around.  To cut the long story short: I
have yet to return after fifteen years.  Throughout this time I have
pondered how circumstantial our sense of self is.  When you are with
your friends in your comfort zone for practically your whole life you
develop a warped identity that falsely attributes to you characteristics
which are actually environmental.  For example, you are treated as a
cool fellow by your peers to the point where you fancy your coolness as
innate.  Then you move to another place, well beyond your bubble and
that impression is gone: people who do not know you do not recognise any
intrinsic coolness in you.  At first you are in denial, though in time
you admit that what was once thought to be yours, what would once
manifest as your power, was a product of a multitude of factors in their
interplay which you just happened to borrow, be the user of, or
otherwise the medium through which it was expressed.  Bewildered at
being unsettled yet oddly fascinated by the newfound uncertainty, you
ask: "what is truly mine, then?", "what did I contribute to such an
impression of self that no environment can take away from me?".  As the
years go by and you keep reflecting on that problématique, the honest
answer always points at your insignificance in the grand scheme of
things: "not much, my friend; not much".

**A.:** Interesting!  Your transformation, so to speak, was a matter of
luck or serendipity.  While it is common to say how I can relate to your
story, the truth is that I have no notion of what it means to have your
identity challenged in such a thoroughgoing way.  How does it feel?
Maybe you can offer an example?

**B.:** It is like you are an amateur photographer.  You take the
occasional picture with your expensive phone, apply filters and the
like, receive lavish praise from your friends and generally hold
yourself in high esteem.  Then you stumble across an unassuming yet
expert photographer who, for whatever reason, wants to help you out by
showing you the shortcomings in your positioning, the limitations of
your equipment, the flaws in how you capture light and shadow and
perspective.  In short, all you believed to be true turns out to be a
lie.  Though you are a bit disappointed you take those words as an
inspiration to learn.  You are poised to push forward and explore the
uncharted territory which opens up before you.  Now extend that to your
perspective on life in general, rather than any given hobby or
occupation.

**A.:** I grow anxious to learn more about myself.  Perhaps I will get
that chance as well.  Though right now I am inclined to be more
purposeful than you ever was in those early days, at least based on your
story.  I have lived here my whole life.  It is unlikely I will move out
in the near future.  Something else has to happen.

**B.:** Each person is different.  There is no point in emulating my
life, as you can never replicate everything that held true in my case.
The constitution of each case is unique.  You may only do what is within
your potentiality and within that of the milieu you are immersed in.  It
may be that a more direct or more deliberate approach will yield the
same or better results.  This very conversation might be enough to get
you started; an exchange of views that I did not have the opportunity to
partake in back in the day, nor had the maturity to ever understand and
appreciate.  All I can do is share what was given to me: it is not mine
in the possessive sense.

**A.:** I wish to start as soon as possible.  Will you be at the beach
tomorrow morning as well?  Maybe you could show me exactly what to do?

**B.:** Careful with your enthusiasm.  It is not to be taken lightly,
nor to be done over the weekend or with a new friend you are excited
about.  I left home, but I also had to outgrow my self.  That cannot be
undone.  Be prepared for the long journey and let go of the tourist
mentality.  As for showing you how it's done, there is no secret.  I
just went for a swim and then for a walk.  It is not magic.  Nothing out
of the ordinary.  What matters is my perspective, which comes from the
elucidation of all those concepts I have presented tonight and during
breakfast.  Just think about your place in the world.  I do not need to
be at the seaside to do that.  I do not have to wake up early, nor to
swim or walk or whatnot.  It just happens that those activities are
easier for me.  Someone else may do the same through dancing or
meditating.  I don't know: each person is unique.

**A.:** Can't you at least keep me company?  I will have all sorts of
questions and you can help me think them through.

[ Read: [why I won't date
you](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-06-16-no-date-with-you/)
(2021-06-16) ]

**B.:** It is better not to seek immediate results.  Avoid the trap.
You are not prepared for them while you will not appreciate what goes
into the end result.  My allusion to the tourist attitude is meant to
suggest that this is a process, not a one-off event or an exhibition of
sorts that you can buy a ticket to.  There are no shortcuts, no life
hack that opens up a direct conduit to such a destination.  Right now
you are still acting out of egoism, as you are trying to hold on to your
self-importance, thinking about why I would not join you and how that
could be an attack on your cherished self-perception.  Relax: it is not
about me and you.  Those false wants are to be expected at such an early
stage.  You will appreciate my gesture after the fact.

**A.:** Okay, I will not insist and shall instead commit to the task
however I can.

**B.:** There is nothing more I can do about it, anyhow.  These are not
swimming lessons, nor am I here to judge you or otherwise measure your
performance.  I already told you all you need to know to get started.
Do not underestimate an exchange of views just because it happens to be
casual and ad-hoc.  Do not dismiss this for its lack of professorial
palaver.  Just because there is music playing in the background and we
happen to have dinner together does not mean that I am putting up an
act.  You will eventually understand as much.  Take those words
seriously.  A friendly presence can still be a tutor and perform a
tutelary function.  An ordinary chat may change your life.  It is the
little things, as I remarked earlier, and how we might learn from them.
Internalise what we have talked about and take it on from there.  I am
confident you can do it, otherwise you would have bailed long ago or
I would have simply changed subjects.  Me being at the beach with you
will likely hamper your efforts and distract you from the task at hand.
The goal is to escape from your egocentrism, not find excuses to spend
more time with others in some new adventure.  Don't grow attached to me.
Chances are you may never see me again once we leave this quaint place.
I am all but irrelevant.  Same goes for the snapshot of the person you
think you are right now.  Be prepared to leave behind your old world,
forgo what you once cherished, just how I did with my hometown and the
version of my self who in my memories stayed there forever.  Besides,
why would I even want you at the beach with me?  It would defeat the
purpose: recall that I need those rare moments of solitude and will thus
do my best to avoid you.  No hard feelings!

[ Read: [On walking
(away)](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-07-19-walking-away/)
(2021-07-19) ]

**A.:** Ah yes, I know: "we can always socialise afterwards".  Though I
have yet to determine what time or day that may be...

**B.:** Neither have I.
