---
title: "On learning and being present"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about learning and being present."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "vmzeWs4uJ1g"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  About parrhesia and dialectic
2.  Sincerity and presence
3.  Our attention is finite
4.  The commodification of our attention span
5.  Knowledge starts with presence
6.  Quality over quantity

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  Today I
will talk to you about a broad theme that covers how we experience the
world and, by extension, the manner in which we accumulate knowledge.
As always, the text of this presentation is available on my website:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-06-25-knowledge-presence>.

There are two main parts to this video.  In the first one, I cover the
general themes of *sincerity* and *presence*.  These are prerequisites to a
favourable disposition towards knowledge and learning.  In the second
part, I tackle the more specialised topic of taking notes.  I explain
what I consider the difference between a task and a note and discuss
what constitutes a high- or low- quality entry to our knowledge base.

This video comes a few days after a detailed demonstration I did on a
programming-related subject: I developed a note-taking package for Emacs
that is focused on simplicity and portability.  I do write a lot.  I do
publish frequently as well&#x2014;just check my website.  I thus want to
share my views as a writer, thinker, and coder.

The core message for you at this introductory stage is that there is no
"killer app", no "life hack", no effortless way to improve yourself.
You have to earn it, by starting with your mindset.  The choice of
technology comes second, together with the technicalities of the method
you choose to implement.  Don't get distracted by lofty promises of a
"second brain" that magically does the work for you.  Valuable notes are
the product of your rigour and discipline.  Focus on the one brain you
have.  Whatever extensions to it will follow from there.

## About parrhesia and dialectic

There is only one English word you may not be familiar with and needs to
be explained at the outset: **parrhesia** (παρρησία).  It is borrowed from
Greek.

Parrhesia literally means "all that is being said" or "all that is put
into words".  In practical usage, parrhesia refers to the disposition of
speaking in earnest, of telling things as they are.  No tricks, no
gimmicks.

We can see the connection between "saying everything that can be said"
and being honest.  With parrhesia, honesty acquires a meaning where
telling the truth is a sign of standing up to the authority of conventions.
To have parrhesia is to prioritise the pursuit of truthfulness over any
given arrangement that may grant power, social status, popularity, and
so on.

In terms of our selfhood, which I covered in the previous entry to this
series, parrhesia is what we need to recognise who we are in the moment;
who we are as that subjective narrative of self that draws linkages
between different contexts and evolving states of affairs.

[ On selfhood: <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-31-selfhood/> ]

We best understand our self amidst the totality of the world with
parrhesia.  Whenever we hold back on "what is being said", whenever we
deem some words ineffable or consider certain aspects of our selfhood off
limits, we necessarily distort or foreshadow our perception of self.

What does honesty about one's selfhood have to do with the broad theme
of accumulating knowledge?  How does it relate to the particular topic
of learning by writing notes?

It is relevant because it determines how you, the subject who seeks
knowledge, interprets the phenomena.  If you cannot be honest with
yourself, if you cannot discern the truth in that which is most
intimate, what makes you believe you can reliably find any other truth?

Parrhesia is a matter of disposition: how we conduct ourselves.  When we
make a habit out of speaking the truth, we necessarily acknowledge the
need to seek the truth, remain open to it, and be ready to revise our
views in the face of compelling evidence and/or cogent counter-arguments
to those of our own.  In other words, we do not stand for *our* truth
but *the* truth, even if it runs contrary to our beliefs, which we must
promptly and blithely revise.  This means that we are not attached to
the narrative of our selfhood we have hitherto developed.  We admit to
our variability, to the potential of change or evolution.

Parrhesia is the other side of inquisitiveness and dubitativeness.  We
cannot be genuinely inquisitive if we are afraid to elucidate the truth.
We may not be dubitative if we only ever provide assent to that which is
expedient or which happens to find currency in our milieu.  Sometimes
our comfort zone is nothing but the prison we have rationalised as cosy.

Parrhesia, then, involves a special brand of courage: that which has the
capacity to challenge the cult of personality we develop about our own
self.  When we are honest, we know how to contain our cockiness, escape
from our egoism, remain grounded, and see our self as yet another node
in this distributed network of universal life that is the Cosmos.

Parrhesia is not about recklessness.  One must recognise the specifics
of the case to know where the virtuous balance is which, *ipso facto*,
is a matter of understanding how things stand.  Furthermore, parrhesia
is not a dogma of truthfulness, a holy war of sorts, where we take it
upon ourselves to demonstrate to others how they are wrong.  No!

We must understand that values are ideals.  They are analytical
constructs which exist in a perfect world.  In our actuality though, we
must exercise practical reason, "common sense" as we say.  The truth is
an ideal as well.  As with all ideals, it has no instantiation that is
equivalent to its absolute form.  What we have in practice are
approximations of the ideal, which is the case for everything.  I cannot
offer you harmony, for example, but only instances of it such as a
melody or a shape.  Even if I put together all melodies and shapes I am
still giving you instances of harmony, not the ideal of it.

Parrhesia thus requires that we acknowledge the actuality of our
subjectivity; the truth that what we learn is a function of factors
whose interplay contributes to states of affairs.  We do not deal in
absolutes.  Our methods are imperfect and our judgement fallible.  To
speak in earnest, then, requires that we recognise our limits.  The most
practical way to do so is to be dialectical.

Dialectic, in its original meaning, is about discourse, dialogue, what
happens "through words": an exchange of views.  Because of parrhesia,
because of its concomitant inquisitiveness and dubitativeness, engaging
in dialectic means that we admit to the possibility of changing our
thesis (position) either to an opposite one, an anti-thesis, or a new
view that might blend the two, a syn-thesis, or simply a new thesis that
supersedes all previous ones.

In summary, we have four connatural qualities of character which
underpin this truth-seeking view of the world and disposition thereof.

-   **parrhesia** is sincerity in elucidation;
-   to be **dubitative** is to doubt, which manifests through the
    recognition that the truth remains elusive;
-   to be **inquisitive** is the attitude of questioning and seeking the
    truth;
-   **dialectic** is encapsulated in the spirit of openness and selflessness
    with which we carry out the above.

When we have these, or at least work towards making them part of our
everyday life, we start perceiving things differently.  For example,
someone at some point in the distant past insulted you.  By being
honest, you understand that the insult is inconsequential and that your
past self does not necessarily determine your current self.  Matters
such as pride are ephemeral and situational.  You then realise that by
letting go, by no longer attaching value to something that has none and
which is not pertinent, you free yourself from its grip.

Ideas can create robust constraints.  When we are in the mindset of
pursuing the truth, we are neither attached to&#x2014;nor bound by&#x2014;any
given arrangement of concepts.  There is a lightness to it, as we always
emancipate ourselves from falsehood; falsehood which may appear as
obsession for something unattainable, the pettiness of "winning the
argument" for the sake of winning, and all those desires to play a role
in order to accommodate social expectations, often to our detriment.

[ Expectations, rules, and role-playing:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-03-expectations-rules-roles/> ]

## Sincerity and presence

I already alluded to this notion of "letting go", of not being attached
to an idea, some project of ours, or particular view of our selfhood.
When non-attachment becomes the norm in our life, we necessarily live in
the moment.  The present enjoys our undivided attention.  Our sense of
self is no longer contingent on any of those concepts we would otherwise
cling to.

Let me be concrete here.  If I were to prepare this presentation with
the ultimate goal of amassing Internet points, such as likes, comments,
subscribers, I would be creating an idol of myself&#x2014;an avatar&#x2014;who
lives and dies in the domain where this video acquires those points or
not.  If then, I do not have the sincerity to understand that I am not
the idol of myself, which I created by mistakenly attributing value to
certain constructs, my immediate experiences will revolve around this
distorted reality.  I will become a victim of my own desires or, rather,
my desires will take on a life of their own and exert control over me,
alienating me from what I do and rendering me heteronomous (I described
"heteronomy" in the previous presentations&#x2014;it is the "rule by
another", the opposite of autonomy).  I will continue to be physically
"here", but my thoughts will be in that imaginary world where the avatar
operates in.

By recognising the truth, I understand that Internet points do not
change me.  With this recording I already say everything I want to
communicate.  What happens afterwards is outside my control, as it is,
for instance, subject to the vicissitudes of some algorithm.  I thus am
not attached to this project, I do not draw up a corresponding idol and
do not get trapped in that mini-game of accumulating of Internet points.

Consider this scenario which you can all relate to either through
personal experience or via your acquaintances.  You brew a coffee or
prepare some tea, walk to the balcony to have your drink, and post on
your social media page something like the following:

> Enjoying the moment! 🫖☕🤗 #motivation #happiness

Instead of actually savouring the moment, you keep your computer device
within reach and constantly check for updates.  You are not "there".
Your mind travels to where your avatar is.  It wonders in that domain
where you acquire validation through how others react to your post about
your experience.  You are not simply enjoying the moment as you claim.

As you obsess over your status update, you do not open yourself up to
the possibility of experiencing the world that unfolds before you.  Did
you observe the patterns in the clouds?  Are there any birds around?
How does the breeze feel right now?  Do you even pay attention to the
drink you purport to enjoy?  Maybe you think you have seen it all.
"Everyday is the same", you say.  But what if you believe in this sort
of constancy exactly because you have a warped perception of things,
which is governed by the idol of you and your idolisations in general?

Why did you post that status update?  Will you lose your friends if you
don't?  Are they that fickle?  Will a 100 likes make the drink taste any
better?  What if you get no likes at all?  Does it ruin your day?  Why
make your experience of the moment contingent on the performance of an
avatar?  Why confer that much power to a notion; power which will be
used against you, such as when you get sad that no-one liked your post?

We often hear people lament how they are a failure in life because they
could not realise their dreams or live up to a certain standard.  Are
they right?  Did they truly fail as human beings?  Or did their avatars
not fulfil their purpose within the confines of whatever mini-game?
Instead of belittling ourselves, why not consider the possibility that
the dreams and aspirations we have are, at times, falsehoods.  Why beat
ourselves into submission when there is a good chance we simply lacked
perspective?  Maybe we were misguided and had the wrong goals.

When we are in the mindset of seeking the truth, we develop the skill of
observing our behaviour in such moments instead of jumping to early
conclusions.  We assess our condition and, with parrhesia, with courage
and plain-spoken-ness, ask the difficult but necessary questions:

-   Why am I seeking social validation for a private affair?
-   Is not my appreciation of the moment sufficient?
-   Would I want my enjoyment to be ruled by popular vote?
-   Do I have a personality or am I merely doing what others want?
-   Is my selfhood limited to the performance of an idol of mine?
-   Why hurt myself by assuming that my ideas were correct in advance?
-   Who is this all-knowing judge, anyway, who brands me as a failure?

There is so much that can be said about the trappings of our imagination
and how we tend to consider them truthful without further consideration.
We escape from the moment, we lose ourselves, we cede control to some
avatar, and eventually feel helpless when things go awry.

By practising parrhesia, we find the courage to stand up and take the
initiative.  We do not allow our self to be reduced to an idol, to a
figment of a convention or role-playing game.  We are more than that.

Think again about this otherwise innocuous act of posting a status
update about your drink.  You might think now, "Why would philosophy
even bother with such details?  Is not philosophy about abstract
magnitudes and academic discussions?"

Philosophy is ultimately realised through quotidian life.  We do
philosophy.  We don't merely preach it or study it.  As such, we can
draw a general point from a particular phenomenon as we couch it in
terms of its wider context.

To continue with the example here, by tackling this seemingly trivial
issue with the help of philosophy, we learn that we can enjoy the moment
without the performative aspect of tokenising the minutia of our life.
By "tokenising" I mean that we convert our experience to something that
has transactional value in a certain domain, which we then trade in a
market in exchange for popularity and validation.

We have to take a step back and assume agency.  Let the moment have our
undivided attention.  There is no longer an idol or avatar that yearns
for those tokens of short-term stimulus.  The idol has no power over us.
It cannot affect us.  There are no troubling thoughts about what our
peers might think of our experience in the here and now.  None of that
bothers and burdens us.  None of it.  The moment just is: we recognise
it as such.

We practice being present in those seemingly "small things" because it
is easier to start with them than with more complex phenomena.  We can
track our progress and notice how a more deliberate disposition is
achievable.  We practice in small increments, one step at a time, until
we learn to remain present consistently, no matter the specifics.

## Our attention is finite

Why do we need to focus, anyway?  What is the reason for being present?
Why not allow ourselves the apparent freedom to wonder away and pursue
everything that comes our way?

Quite simply, our time is finite.  We only have a few hours each day
during which we are productive and can stay active on a given task.  In
the grand scheme of things, we have but a few years to live.  Our
humanity makes it impossible to experience what the world has to offer
in its totality.  We must learn to pick and choose among the innumerable
stimuli that affect us and trigger us into action.

Everything out there has an effect on us.  The colours, the figures, the
sounds, the ideas we have about them or because of them.  Everything.
By being in the world, we necessarily are *contextualised*.  Who we are
and what we do is framed, informed, influenced, conditioned, or
otherwise determined by all those magnitudes, large or small, that apply
to us.  We cannot understand our presence in a vacuum, in some notional
state of nothingness where we exist as a decontextualised mind, or
conscience, or soul.  To be, is to be part of the Cosmos.

Action and reaction, the very idea of a feedback loop, implies language.
Something happens, which we can describe as the transmission of a
message, and something else occurs in response to it, which may be the
reply to this message.  In its most basic form, this universal language
is binary.  As we know from computers, binary language builds gestalt
forms of incredible complexity and detail.  Do not underestimate how the
seemingly trivial mechanism of cause and effect leads to elaborate
structures.

As humans, we have mechanisms for processing and filtering this cosmic
language.  A lot of what happens to us never even registers in our
conscience, such as how exposure to sunlight helps our body synthesise a
certain vitamin.  It has a profound effect on our organism, yet we do
not actively engage in its making through our purposeful actions.

Other mechanisms of ours involve conscious participation.  This is the
part of the universal language we do interpret.  It is where we can
implement changes and work towards improving ourselves.  Consider, for
example, the case where you are sitting somewhere and after a few
seconds you pull out your smartphone to check for status updates.  There
is no pressing reason to do it.  You already checked your phone a few
minutes ago.  Why do you have this seemingly irresistible urge to take
your focus away from your surroundings and shift it towards that mini
computer of yours?  Can you spend five minutes without that gadget?
Look around you.  Is the decor good enough?  What are your thoughts
about its prevailing colours and patterns?  Would you change them?  How?

The point is to admit that your attention span is finite.  If you
constantly get drawn away from the moment by your avatars, you will not
have enough time for activities that can enrich your life.  A meaningful
conversation.  An evening of reading.  A hike in the nearby mountains.
These can be fulfilling only when you partake in them wholeheartedly.
Imagine forgetting what you just read.  Not nice, is it?

If you do not become considerate about how you use your time in those
aspects you do control, you can never gather the energy to stay focused
on what you want to do in the moment.  There will always be some
distraction denying you of anything profound.  You shall then remain
confined to superficialities and be left with that feeling of emptiness.

To be clear, we cannot avoid all distractions simply by using our brain.
It is not enough, at least not without intense training.  There are many
types of stimuli which take the form of an addiction: we can't just
unthink them and move on.  Addiction requires therapy, which always
depends on the specifics of the case.  In general though, when we find
that something has a physical pull on us, we must try to disempower it
by not giving in.

As a first step, we can escape from those impulses by removing ourselves
from their reach.  Is your smartphone the source of your distractions?
Shut it off and seal it away for an hour.  Give it to a person you trust
and ask them to leave the premises with it.  Do not take it with you
everywhere you go.  Try to impose a schedule in your daily life where
you disconnect from the Web, literally and figuratively.  Do whatever it
takes to put a distance between yourself and the source of your
distractions.  Once you learn to live without them physically, you will
gradually practice how to control yourself mentally.

Parrhesia here means that we do not deny the fact that stimuli have an
effect on us.  Remember that we are always subject to the cosmic
language.  Lying or pretending does not solve the problem.  Parrhesia is
to admit the potency of those magnitudes and seek ways to deny them the
space they need to grow inside of us.  Do not assign value to them.
Refrain from becoming invested in them.

Just as we are not attached to our own narrative of self and the
aspirations associated with our projects, we must practice not to be
governed by those dependencies either.

## The commodification of our attention span

Notice that many offerings we are exposed to are free of cost.  The
so-called "social media" do not charge us any money for using them.
They just trigger us into engaging with their platform multiple times
per day under the pretext of checking the news or learning what our
friends are up to.

Similarly, many of the video games we have on our computers follow a
free-to-play model and expect us to achieve progress through endless
hours of grinding out repetitive tasks in pursuit of some "achievement".

Even technical websites, such as GitHub, are now introducing a gimmick
of showing off tokenistic accomplishments.  If they push on with that
initiative, they will be incentivising us to put up a performance of
gaming the system instead of focusing on the substance; a performance
like that status update we make about our morning drink.

In a generic economy, all those businesses would be competing for our
money, at least as a point of entry.  But if they do not want to be paid
for their goods and services at the outset, what could they possibly be
competing for?  Our attention, of course.  Our attention is valuable
because it is finite.

Businesses are commodifying our attention span.  They want to keep us
active on their platform for as long as possible.  The time we spend
with them is time not spent on other activities.  This becomes, in
itself, an exclusive domain.  The dominion over our attention span, the
oligopoly built on top of it, can then be monetised in various ways.  As
such, products are designed to be addictive, especially when they have
no upfront monetary cost though not only.

It is not just digital goods that do this.  Consumables, such as
processed food are no different.  You must have heard practically every
doctor warn against the harms of junk food.  Yet consumption of it
remains prevalent.  Why?  Because it is addictive.  All those intense
flavours, all the additives, are part of a concerted effort to extract
value from this finite resource of ours: our attention.  They want us to
keep coming back.

Have you ever spent the morning thinking about the meal you will have
later in the day?  After you consume your lunch, do you still keep it in
your mind, such as by raving about how tasty it was?  How would you
describe this phenomenon?  Is it not a means by which you lose presence?
Instead of focusing on the present, you obsess about some dish in your
immediate past or future.

Again, we notice how little things such as the intensity of the food's
flavour can inhibit our focus on the here and now.  It is all those
small things we need to account for and we must train to not give into
them if we want to consistently remain present.

As everyone competes for our attention, marketers need to find ways to
make their products stand out.  For productivity solutions, this
typically involves promises along the lines of making us a "10x" of
whatever it is we are.  Or they peddle something that appeals to our
inability to focus over prolonged sessions, such as a shortcut to
efficiency, a conduit to wisdom, and so on.

An app on its own cannot rescue us from all the distractions.  We need
to approach matters with sincerity, with a spirit of openness, and start
doing what is necessary, mentally and physically, to gain or regain control.

## Knowledge starts with presence

Now we move to the note-taking part of this presentation.  While I cover
the case of written notes, what I am about to say applies to mental
notes as well, *mutatis mutandis*.

Let me start with a distinction I make between tasks or reminders and
notes.

-   The former are actionable items that target an activity, such as a
    TODO entry to record this presentation.  Tasks or reminders can be
    used as part of a workflow for building a knowledge base.  For
    example, when we are reading a book, we might want to record a
    reminder that something important is referenced in page 10.

-   By contrast, notes are the constituents of our knowledge base.  Each
    of them encapsulates what we have learnt about the given topic.  They
    contain valuable information that tells us something which can stand
    on its own about a phenomenon or state of affairs.

Both tasks and notes are at their best when they are precise and
sufficient.  Precision means that they are communicated without
ambiguity and have clear start and end points.  For instance a reminder
to "read the Emacs manual" is imprecise and not very helpful.  Should we
read it from the beginning until the final page in one go?  Are we
looking for something specific or is this supposed to be a pastime
activity?  What is the ultimate objective of this task?  A better
reminder is to read a given chapter in the manual in order to learn
about a specific piece of functionality.

Same principle for notes.  We want them to be self-contained.

Continuing with this theme&#x2026;  Here is the anatomy of a bad note:

    Today I watched Prot's presentation.  Good stuff!

    https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-06-25-knowledge-presence

This is the kind of information that has no profundity.  It states a
fact, records the superficialities of an impression, and provides a link
for further reading.  If we take this note on its own, we cannot extract
knowledge from it.  We do not know what the allusion to "good stuff"
entails.  What caught our attention exactly?  Is there something
specific we gathered from the presentation?  Did it change our mind
about something we were already doing?  If so, how?  Did we have any
disagreements and which were they precisely?

The idea is to apply what we learnt about parrhesia and presence.  We do
not want to reduce note-taking to something akin to that frivolous
status update on social media I mentioned before.  This is not a
popularity contest, not a performance to regale our social group.  We
want to focus our attention on the activity of explaining, in our own
terms and as best we can, what the subject matter is.

A good note focuses on the elucidation of one point.  If there are any
asides or tangential remarks, they can be turned into their own entries.
Why?  Because the practice of focusing on one discrete thing helps us
stay in the flow of parrhesia and presence.  We can always combine
different threads once we get better at staying focused.  The key is to
start small and build from there.

An easy way to test if a note can stand on its own is to either record
it on a piece of paper or imagine it is printed on one.  We want to
have the most low-tech version of our material.  No links, no previews,
none of the fancy stuff that technology enables.  Once we get that, we
can better assess the usefulness of what is written.

-   If our note does not say much on its own, it is not good enough.
-   If our note includes too many links without sufficiently describing
    them or explaining what the connection is, we are putting ourselves in
    the process of having to hunt down the snippet of knowledge we wanted
    to record.  Not optimal.
-   If our note requires special software to be accessed, we might lose it
    in the long-term which again detracts from its value.

The general idea is that we want to take notes carefully.  Capturing our
thoughts is one part, but it is not enough.  We ought to read and
re-read what we have.  The goal is to try to anticipate if our future
self will find the record helpful.  We do not want to burden our future
self with incomplete thoughts and fragmentary information.  When we
retrieve our note we should not have to go down a rabbit hole of
clicking through links in order to eventually discern the thread running
through our entries.  That might cause frustration and lead to
distractions.

We can do better by focusing on the here and now.  The key is to take as
much time as necessary to substantiate one thought as best we can in
that moment.  If we have doubts or if there are any lacunae in our
knowledge, we must admit them then and there.  The note is not supposed
to be perfect&#x2014;this is not about some performance for the public eye.
It just needs to be an honest representation of our current ability.

Another way to anticipate a bad note is to assess its potential worth.
We get better at this as we gain experience.

Suppose I stumble across a website with tips and tricks about scuba
diving in the ocean.  I am not a diver, I live in a mountainous area,
and may never find an application for this kind of information.  If I am
not selective with what I want to focus on, I will create a bookmark.

Later, I will find another site which provides insight on hunting
techniques.  I am not a hunter and will likely never be one.  Again, if
I do not impose any kind of restraint, I will store yet another
bookmark.

Then there will be a third website which discusses the most effective
techniques employed by basketball players.  I am not playing basketball
and likely never will, so again I have no use for this.  Without much
thought, I will impulsively add a third bookmark to the list.

Before realising it, I will have accumulated all this garbage which
pretends to be valuable knowledge.  I cannot do anything with it.  For
me, all these trivia are useless.  If I am in the habit of creating
records that have a high noise to signal ratio, I am doing myself a
disservice.  Instead of setting up a knowledge base I can rely on, I am
creating yet another major distraction.

The old adage of quality over quantity applies here as well.  With
parrhesia, we impose order to our chaotic propensities as we pick and
choose those items that are likely to give us the most value.

We must never forget that our attention is finite.

The other way to avoid a bad note is to be aware of the motivation
behind it.  Does the creation of the new record come from a position of
control or is it a selfish reaction to something?

Suppose we are taking notes about an insightful video we are watching.
We pause every couple of minutes to write down what we think.  Sometimes
this is helpful, though it can also work to our detriment, as we lack
context.  We have not heard the whole presentation yet and cannot be
sure if there is some more nuance to it or if an initial concept is
expanded upon further into the video.  As such, those in-the-moment
notes may simply be capturing our prior thoughts, not what we learnt
from the source material.

With parrhesia, we take a step back and tell ourselves: "Am I being
honest here?  Do I really need to rush to early conclusions?  Who am I
trying to impress, anyway?"  By doing this, by maintaining our presence
and focus on the moment, we keep the right mindset of not allowing
premature notions to masquerade as high-quality notes.  Instead, we can
use tasks or reminders which we will revisit after watching the whole
video.

We thus allow ourselves the possibility to remain open to new ideas.
This is not about openness for its own sake, as I already explained the
importance of being selective.  This is where the dialectical side of
our disposition comes to the fore.  We engage with the source material
with the understanding that we are interested in approximating the
truth.  We thus give it a fair chance in a spirit of selflessness.
Remember that we do not stand for *our* truth but only for *the* truth.  If
we have to let go of our thesis, so be it: the review emancipates us
from a falsehood.

## Quality over quantity

The broad theme of this presentation is to conduct ourselves in a manner
that is purposeful and considerate.  We want to retain focus in order to
perform at the best of our abilities.  We wish to be honest to omit or
avoid the superficialities that have no longer-term value in our life.

Our goal is to be present, otherwise we misuse the finite resource we
have at our disposal, which is our attention span and, by extension, our
time.

Rather than let ourselves be held hostage by our own idolisations or
avatarisations, we diligently approach matters with a critical eye.  The
intent is to put an end to any tendencies of showing off, of calling for
needless attention, of doing something for the sake of the performance
in the confines of a social mini-game.

I am of the opinion that we are successfully building up our knowledge
base when we can describe its individual items in our own words.  When
we put in the effort, when we spend quality time substantiating our
thoughts, we practice the skills of knowledge retention.

By contrast, whenever we introduce too much automation and too much
reliance on technological pampers, we risk becoming lazy and complacent,
because we no longer put in the requisite work.  If, for instance, our
notes consist of an excerpt and a link to the original source, we
encounter the problems I already mentioned: the notes do not help our
future self extract valuable insights from them.

Knowledge has to be accessible, both conceptually and technologically.
Bad notes are inaccessible at the level of their content.  Yet there is
a strong case to be made that even good notes can become bad ones when
the underlying medium is not conducive to longer-term storage.  If we
can only access our notes via a specialised app or an online service,
the chances of data loss are quite high.  Our knowledge base thus lacks
resilience.  It is not portable and our future self may not be able to
benefit from it.

Too many features often burden us with "mental dependencies", with
cognitive load, especially if we are not well trained in parrhesia and
in maintaining presence.  Instead of letting us focus on the task of
writing, featurism seeks our attention.  Perhaps to add some markup that
is not really necessary, or to make certain syntactic constructs look a
bit prettier, or even to use that technologically impressive but
ultimately useless gimmick that would surely impress our peers.

Just as we ought to be selective with the information we gather, we must
to be mindful of the tools we use.  Too much convenience may come with
the hidden cost of occupying our attention span.  We do not wish that.

In conclusion, we start by taking care of the one brain we have.  We
want to develop the disposition of openness, dubitativeness, and
inquisitiveness.  This disposition is a prerequisite to knowledge and
learning.  We also need to improve our focus, to always be present.  We
do that by removing distractions, curing our addictions, and being
honest about our choices, actions, and goals.  The technology we choose
must be consistent with those qualities.  We want it to be an extension
of who we are, not an arrangement that holds us hostage to the interests
of some business or, generally, that forces us to deviate from our path.
