---
title: "On insecurity, confidence, and aloofness"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about insecurity, confidence, and aloofness."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "-qp3UpzUOtk"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  Definitions
2.  Self-doubt, expectations, and ideals
3.  Misused idealism and insecurity
4.  Selfhood, ownership, and insecurity
5.  Selfhood and the comfort zone
6.  Be careful with ideals

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  In this
presentation I want to talk to you about matters of disposition: how we
conduct ourselves in a social setting, what is our sense of self, and
how we can cope with the relevant challenges.

The idea is to use practical examples and connect them to abstract
concepts.  Studying everyday scenaria makes it easier for us to
understand the meaning of those abstractions.  We can discern them in
facts we are already familiar with.  We go from the particulars to the
general, while from the general we can better comprehend the
combinations between the particulars: we start thinking in terms of
relations and systems.

As always, the text of this presentation is available on my website:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-25-insecurity-confidence-aloofness>

If you are watching this on the video hosting platform, there will be a
link in the description.

## Definitions

I will use two Greek words in this presentation, so I must first explain
what they mean:

-   **Aktisia (ακτησία):** non-ownership, else the state of not having
    possessions.

-   **Ataraxia (αταραξία):** non-disturbance or tranquillity, else a state
    where one is not moved or pressured by evolving states of affairs.

Hints to&#x2014;or mentions of&#x2014;these concepts can be found in my previous
videos on philosophy (and other works).  As a starting point, check this
section of my website for entries with the `video` tag:
<https://protesilaos.com/books>.

Though you don't have to, as I will explain everything here.

## Self-doubt, expectations, and ideals

Self-doubt is when you question yourself.  You want to have a healthy
dose of scepticism and do a reality check from time-to-time.  This is
fruitful: it ensures you do not get absorbed in your own subjective
narrative of selfhood and all the misunderstandings that may go with it.

The tricky thing with self-doubt is that it can easily be mishandled.
If done carelessly, it turns into self-denial.  This is a state of mind
where you refuse to give credit to yourself.  It no longer manifests as
a questioning attitude or a form of criticism.  There is nothing fair
about it.  It is a polemic, an attack against everything you do.

Self-doubt turns into self-denial when we set unrealistic expectations
about our self.  For example, we notice this in people from a young age
when they develop issues about their body image.  They see all those
highly edited pictures in magazines or TV and they get this idea that
they are ugly.  Then the self-denial moves from a perception of ugliness
into self-loathing and self-hate.  The person feels worthless.

While beauty standards are an obvious case we can all relate to
immediately, they are not the only one.  In society, we have standards
for everything.  How we should express ourselves, how we are perceived
as professionals at the workplace, what our income or status says about
our character, who we should have relationships with, and so on.

Everything we do has a standard.  There is an ideal made out of it.
Whether this ideal is correct or not does not really matter for our
immediate experience with it.  For instance, we may say that modern
beauty standards are inhumane, but that does not solve the problem for
people who are already feeling the pressure to be so-called "beautiful".

---

Ideals are not inherently wrong.  I am not saying that the reason we
develop self-hate is because we have ideals.  No!  I'm hinting at the
need for a balanced approach in understanding what an ideal represents.

Ideals are mental constructs.  They are representations of patterns we
observe in the world.  We trace the common in the multitude of various
phenomena and we turn that into a concept.  We basically keep a perfect
version of the pattern in our head.

Think, for example, how we derive the notion of `Dog`.  We observe all
sorts of specimens.  Small dogs, large dogs, service dogs, catch dogs,
and so on.  There are many breeds, landraces, and mixtures between them.
Our abstract `Dog` then must not have specific attributes, because those
will not exist in all actual dogs.  If, say, the ideal `Dog` had long hair
then we would have to rule out all short-haired dogs as a different
species.  That would be wrong.  So the `Dog` concept needs to be abstract
and sufficiently generic to cover all specimens.

All ideals are generic in this way, otherwise they remain open to
review.  Since I mentioned beauty standards, think about the ideal of
`Beauty`.  We cannot limit it to how humans look, because then we can't
admire a sunset by saying "oh, this is beautiful".  We also can't see
the beauty in a piece of art or in an elegant program, and so on.  As
such, `Beauty` has to be generic as well.  And the same for all ideals.

Strictly speaking, *generic representations* are not actual in our world.
Everything we have is instantiated with specific attributes.  There is
no such thing as a generic dog with no particular skull size, for
example.  It has to have a head with a certain bone structure.  The gist
is that the actual cannot be ideal; the ideal cannot be actual.

---

We can thus infer that ideals do not exist *directly*.  They do exist as
patterns in this world, which are discernible, but they do not get to be
experienced as such.  We can only understand ideals through their
instantiations.  For example, we get what `Dog` is because we have seen or
interacted with all sorts of dogs, so we have a pretty good idea of what
the abstraction of those would be.  The more we know about the
particulars, the finer and more generic our ideal will be.

The point, then, is to appreciate the role that ideals play in our
everyday life.  We cannot become the ideal student, the ideal
professional, the ideal friend, the ideal philosopher, and so on.  We
can only ever have approximations of those mental images.

To use ideals properly, we need to avoid the common mistake of thinking
that they can exist *as such*.  Imagine that you will only settle for the
ideal lover.  Well, I have bad news for you&#x2026;  You will always be
disappointed as such a person cannot exist.  Our ideals are perfect and
generic, but everything that is an instantiation of them has to be
imperfect and specific by comparison.  Humans are imperfect throughout.
All of us.

Ideals are used correctly when they are our guides to action.  We want
to have a criterion that helps us decide in any given situation which
among the alternatives is the closest to its perfect form.  We do this
with knowledge of the fact that we live in a world of imperfections.
The ideal thus serves as the proxy of the good; not as its enemy.  It is
here where self-denying folks commit an error.  And this includes me
from a few years ago, so I am not blaming you out there.  The error is
in believing that we can have ideals in our life.  Perfectly honest
people, genuinely cooperative colleagues, pure intentions, and so on.

---

When we have this notion that ideals can exist, we necessarily operate
with the expectation that they *should* exist.  We wait and wait until we
find them.  Though as the years go by and we don't get ideals in our
life, we start to grow anxious and become unsettled.  We are
disappointed.  "Why can't people just be perfect?" we wonder.

These sort of unfulfilled expectations can then turn us into naysayers.
We become unfair with things and this makes us dogmatic.  It is how we
end up hating our self and the world at-large.  We see that we cannot
have perfect beauty, so we go to the other extreme of insisting that we
are absolutely repulsive.  Idealism thus begets negativity and
frustration.  It leads to the propensity to dismiss the worth in things.

The person who is an idealist has to be able to distinguish between what
they want and what is possible.  I am speaking in conceptual terms here.
By "possible" I do not mean what is politically expedient or appropriate
in the given cultural milieu or institutional order.  I am referring to
the impossibility of ideals ever being actualised, as I already said.

It is fine to have ideals.  We want to have them.  The key is to learn
how to use them properly.  They help us aspire to our highest.  But they
must not be used against us or against the rest of world.  We want the
ideal to empower us to go from the available, to the good; from the good
to the better; from the better to the best.  We do not want ideals to be
used as a reason to punish ourselves and to dismiss everything this life
has to offer.

The self-denying and ultimately self-hating fellow must be understood as
an idealist who applies ideals incorrectly.  It is an imbalanced method;
a method that is not informed by wisdom.

## Misused idealism and insecurity

Let's return to the example with the issues people have about their body
image.  I am using this because it is relatable to all of us.  These
people have developed&#x2014;or been indoctrinated into&#x2014;an idealised notion
of what it means to be beautiful which they use to belittle and
ultimately reject what they have.  For whatever reason, they do not
acknowledge that ideals cannot be instantiated *as ideals*.

Idealists who are misguided in this way are dogmatic in how they take
the ideal for granted.  They do not criticise it.  They do not try to
think that maybe&#x2014;just maybe&#x2014;something is amiss.  Television,
marketing, social media all reinforce certain stereotypes which are
misconstrued as objective ideals.  I say "misconstrued" because they are
not sufficiently generic, as ideals ought to be.  They are inane standards.

People are not at fault.  When seemingly everyone out there holds those
views, we become intimidated in even questioning them.  It takes a lot
of courage to say "hold on a moment, this is a lie!"  Most people will
not do that because they are inclined or conditioned to go with the
majority and play it safe.  So a cultural construct appears in the mind
as a universal constant.  The thinking is that "this is what beauty is,
full stop" and it does not tolerate any counterpoints.

Due to the way it is framed, the misguided idealist is prone to develop
tunnel vision and intolerance of alternative views.  They will judge
everything on the basis of their narrowly conceived ideal.  For example,
they will assess the worth of a person based exclusively on their looks.
They won't care if the person is nice, knowledgeable, has a sense of
humour, sensitivities about art, or whatnot.  It is an all-or-nothing
kind of deal based on appearances alone.

---

The false ideal and its inconsiderate application thus inhibits the
person from experiencing the world as it actually is, with all its flaws
and imperfections, with its complexity, and with the multifaceted
reality of its beings.

Society with its culture plays a catalytic role in how we think about
our self.  I have explained this point in greater detail in a previous
presentation about selfhood:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-31-selfhood/>

The gist is that we use the opinions of others about who we are as (i)
confirmation of our thoughts or (ii) we try to become who others think
we should be.  Either way, our selfhood is not a strictly private
affair.  It emerges through intersubjective modes of behaviour.

We can already get a sense of this intersubjectivity by thinking again
about how ideas that find currency in our milieu influence the behaviour
of individuals.  Societies establish rules which define roles for
classes of their members.  If a person has certain characteristics or is
in a given situation, they have to act in accordance with the
requirements of the role.  It is no longer about the person as such, but
rather about the institution, the role carried out by the person.

When we take those roles for granted, we become the institution.  We are
who the rules of the game demand that we ought to be.  And this is where
the line between one's notional "true self" and their culturally
instituted self is blurred.  We cannot really have the person in a
decontextualised state to determine what comes from their environment
and what doesn't.  So we have to take selfhood as this subjective
narrative which, at the very least, has strong intersubjective influences.

---

But let me be practical here as I may be becoming too vague.  I want to
help you follow my line of reasoning and see how philosophy is a
practical affair.  I don't need to tell you about all the falsehoods we
find on the Internet, though imagine this caricature of the social media
influencer.  They will post what is considered a "hot" picture with the
caption:

> Be yourself ❤️

Contrary to the salient point of "Be yourself", they will take a hundred
shots to find the one that flatters their figure the most.  They will
likely heavily modify the photograph to remove blemishes or, perhaps,
add more emphatic curves here and there.  You know how it works.

The issue is that those who are already misusing ideals do not
critically assess this sort of publication.  They don't notice the
disconnect between what is shown and what is stated.  Instead, they get
feedback that reinforces their already dogmatic attitude and feeds into
their growing insecurity or warped expectations.  They see an influencer
showing off what so-called "beauty" is supposed to be and they are,
well, influenced to think accordingly and to propagate those beliefs.

As for the meaning of the message to "be yourself" in such cases, it is
but idle talk.  Honesty is here sacrificed to the altars of social
validation, instant gratification, and outright hypocrisy.  There is
nothing substantive about it.  I am not blaming the influencer though,
as they too are a victim of those very standards they vindicate and
embody.  But more on this later.

---

Extend this mechanism to all cases where standards and concomitant
social expectations are involved.  The person who is misusing idealism
gets the message that this is how things ought to be and, due to their
wrong mindset, due to their dogmatism, they conclude that those are the
reasons why they are worthless as a person.

Insecurity comes from self-consciousness of one's perceived limitations
as seen from the imaginary social eye.  This is key: the belief that
there exists an omniscient and ubiquitous judge "out there" that will
punish us for our every misstep.  Of course, this is not limited to the
example I have used with beauty standards, though that gives us a fairly
good indication of how things work.

Insecurity is fuelled by the belief we have that we are not good enough.
We are conditioned to assign value to all those lofty targets and we
ultimately feel inferior to them.  Even when we find ourselves in a new
situation, we assume that those standards still apply or that something
relevant is in force.  Thus our self-impression is that of the impostor.
Deep down we have this self-doubt that pushes towards self-denial, as we
think we are incompetent and start hating who we are.

We do not question the presence of this "social eye" as we are used to
it in every situation.  We know that people judge others for everything.
We would rather not find ourselves in that position.  We wish to be
loved or, generally, to feel safe.  We are extra careful.  Yet there is
a fine line dividing caution from prejudice and relevant self-fulfilling
prophecies.  If we truly believe that we are an impostor, then all our
actions will be defined by this pervasive sense of insecurity.  We will
look insecure and, consequently, appear incompetent exactly because that
is how we operate.

## Selfhood, ownership, and insecurity

I believe that at the core of insecurity lies the intuitive belief we
have about ownership.  We think that every critique is an attack on our
person.  As we are of the view that our self has specific attributes
that we cherish and want to hold onto, we perceive criticism as an
attempt to deprive us of those things we think we own.  For example, if
someone says that we are wrong, we become defensive because we fear that
our intelligence, or pride, or something related, is under threat.  We
do not want to lose what we think is ours.

Do we own anything though?  The belief in ownership is deeply embedded
in our conduct.  We take it for granted.  You may be thinking that this
question I just asked is some kind of trick.  But I do not play games: I
am serious and want you to think about this topic very carefully.  Do we
own anything?

We think we own stuff due to the association we make of their joint
presence or correlation.  For instance, our sense of self involves the
notion of how good our memory is.  We take this as a definitive
characteristic of who we are.  Though it is not truly inalianable,
meaning that it can be taken away from us.  Under certain conditions,
our organism as a human may develop in ways that do not include this
attribute.  You slip, hit your head, and sustain an injury that causes a
permanent condition.  You no longer have what you thought was yours&#x2026;

Consider your appearance, your beauty, or whatever else.  You really
care about it.  It defines who you are.  Is it yours though?  Who owns
what?  Can you truly hold on to it, no matter what?  You cannot.  You
definitely cannot.  Whatever you think is yours, is so by coincidence.
It is not a necessary relationship.

---

We need to understand how the universe works and accept what is
transient as just that.  Our presence and all of its attributes are
ephemeral and coincidental: they are contingent on a multitude of
factors.  We tend to think of our self in a vacuum.  Even the expression
I just used of "presence and all of its attributes" is an analytical
construct: a product of thought.  In practice, those different names do
not exist as standalone magnitudes that can be neatly separated.

We do not consider the intersubjectivity of selfhood that I already
explained, but we also forget about the natural order.  Our presence in
the cosmos is always&#x2014;always&#x2014;framed, informed, conditioned,
influenced, or otherwise determined by factors beyond our control.  What
our actuality is, is not simply a function of our volition, else free
will.  We cannot be whomever we want, no matter what.  The prevailing
conditions delineate a horizon of possibilities.

The main insight for us right now is that ownership is an illusion.  We
do not own anything.  Not our looks, not our brains, not our self.
Whoever you think you are, there is always a chance that you are
refashioned into someone else, given the right triggers or modifications
in the constitution of the case; in the factors whose interplay affects
your presence.

Everything we think we own is *alienable*, meaning that it can be taken
away from us and be rendered alien vis-à-vis our person.  We understand
this point with possessions, like our phone or clothes, even though we
have an elaborate legal-institutional order that envisages and
safeguards property rights.  We know that property is conventional and
that it does not exist without the instituted reality that enables it.
We just extend this principle to what we consider our internal world.

---

We thus arrive at **aktisia**, the state of non-ownership.  We acknowledge
that owning stuff is an illusion.  It is based on the instinct we have
for self-preservation which establishes in us a bias in favour of
certain beliefs.  We assume we own our self, our body, our possessions,
simply because this helps us survive.  That's perfectly fine.  Though
when we do philosophy, we start developing what I have explained before
as the mystical side of our being.

[ Read/watch: Ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-16-ataraxia-moderation-mysticism/> ]

Mystic, mysticism, mysterious, and related concepts have to do with
initiation in a corpus of knowledge or way of thinking.  If we encounter
something we do not know, we think it is mysterious.  Though this merely
indicates our ignorance.  The subject matter is not inherently
unintelligible or incomprehensible.  It is just unknown to us, as we
have not been initiated in the relevant school of thought or discipline.

Our mystical side, the one that is informed by wisdom, is the least
developed of our facets, as opposed to instincts.  But as we cultivate
our mystical qualities, we begin to overcome the built-in prejudices we
have.  This happens organically.  It is the product of a life-long
commitment to philosophy.  By understanding things at a deeper level, we
no longer have this impression of selfcentredness: we do not think that
the whole world revolves around us and that we somehow are special.  We
ultimately do not even operate on the basis of our ego.

Aktisia, however, is a profound realisation that requires a lot of work.
It is not something we learn over the weekend and then carry on with our
routines.  It changes our life.

---

When we do not admit to aktisia, we assume that we own our self.  We
then think that we also own everything that is an extension of our self.
For example, we are emotionally invested in our projects or ideas.  We
want them to succeed and be proven right.  This is a way for our ego to
find fulfilment.  We defend them as if we were fighting for our
survival, exactly because we take them as our own possessions, as a part
of who we are.

This links back to insecurity.  When we labour under the prejudice that
we own stuff which are alienable, we fear that we might lose them.  And
as we associate our selfhood with them, we are afraid that a loss of
this sort constitutes a diminution of who we are.  Insecurity, then, is
fuelled by the justifiable albeit mistaken presumption of ownership.

Here I will say something you may find strange.  Confidence is just like
insecurity.  They are two sides of the same coin, for it too is an
attitude that is predicated on ownership.  Confidence also requires that
we have things we can cling on to; things which define us as unalterable
and give us this seemingly unflinching resolve.

Both insecurity and confidence are fragile because they spring from a
baseless belief of owning our self and all of its apparent extensions.
Given the appropriate stimuli, these thoughts can be exposed and be
undone, leading to the collapse of everything built on top of them.

Admitting to aktisia thus helps us overcome such a dichotomy and its
precarious state.  We all want to be confident.  Confidence is the best
thing possible, or so we believe.  Though confidence presupposes
commitment to an illusory state of affairs, which is reducible to the
claim that what we have is inalienable and permanent.

---

This leads me to the next point.  The illusion of ownership comes with
another presumption: the belief in permanence.  However, our life and
every aspect of it is impermanent.  Our notion of self evolves over time
from our teenage years, to adulthood, and as we grow older.  It depends
on our experiences and social interactions, among others.  Our
appearance changes as well, as does our "inner world", and all else.

We know about this.  We are readily aware of it.  Though we do not think
deeply of impermanence as doing so would challenge our view of
ownership.  There may be a built-in resistance there.  Though it is not
insurmountable.  Once we get past that initial hesitation and admit to
impermanence, we also notice how what we take for granted in our life is
contingent on a multitude of factors beyond our control.  And then we
ultimately arrive at the admission of aktisia.

When we reach that point, we are finally freed from the biases that fuel
both insecurity and confidence.  There no longer is a fear that we may
lose something, or an aspiration that we might gain something else, as
we already know that we cannot truly own anything.

Aktisia is a state of mind.  It is not that suddenly we have no self, no
appearance, no recognisable attributes.  We are still human.  It just
means that we are not attached to those qualities or their derivatives.
We are not emotionally invested in them.  If we have something, we are
okay.  If we lose it, we are okay.  In other words, we remain indifferent.

Such is a state of **ataraxia**, else tranquillity.  We operate with
aloofness.  There is no fear, no desires, no past or future.  There is a
lightness to our being, where we merely operate in the here-and-now
unencumbered by all those burdens we would otherwise carry on our back.

## Selfhood and the comfort zone

Ataraxia changes how we live our life.  We are no longer going through a
constant struggle of trying to maintain our happiness, to accumulate
more things, or to fight for what we consider as rightfully ours.
Through aktisia, we overcome the bias of egocentrism.  The ego is like
an insatiable monster that keeps asking for more.  But once we escape
from its grip, we simply accept what happens to be the case.

This brings me to the topic of one's comfort zone.  We often hear or may
even say it ourselves that we need to relax and just be comfortable with
who we are.  "Be yourself", right?  The idea is to practice self-love
and to not try to conform with whatever inane standard.  If we think
about the examples I provided earlier, such as with the beauty
standards, this advice is fecund.  It can help people avoid the
suffering associated with the impossibility of conforming with an
unrealistic criterion.  That's good.

However, to be yourself does not guarantee that you start walking on the
right path.  It might be that you remain misguided, driven by cultural
norms, instinctive biases, and so on.  There is nothing in self-love
that ensures emancipation from fear and desires.  It is better than a
living hell, sure.  Though it still is problematic in its own ways.

I have said before that sometimes the comfort zone is but a prison that
we have gotten used to and thus consider a cosy environment.  It makes
us feel good superficially due to our familiarity with it.  Though this
may well be a case of "the evil you know is better than the one you
don't".  I am sure you have heard this expression before or at least
something like it.  It basically captures the view that familiarity is
giving us a sense of comfort even when it is not really good.

---

The problem with trying to practice self-love and to "just be yourself",
is that your selfhood is likely to be predicated on years of experience
and conduct that are biased in major ways.  Think about someone who has
always been insecure.  They have the propensity to guard themselves from
getting exposed, by planning everything ahead of time.  They tend to
have a prefigured response to every stimulus or social interaction.  And
when they are caught in an unfamiliar situation, they tend to panic.

This is an older version of me.  I am not blaming anyone.  I used to
operate in ways that would allow me to be in a controlled environment.
This would help me figure out all possible outcomes and decide in
advance how best to react.  Though this seldom works, as life is complex
and our neat schemes tend to not correspond with the state of affairs.
Hence the anxiety and panic attacks.

Now, if we tell such a person to simply love who they are, we are not
doing them any kind of favour.  We are, in effect, encouraging them to
stay in their prison.  It is like we are saying, "oh, but your cage is
so pretty".  Whereas what we really want, when we conduct ourselves with
wisdom, is to help people overcome their own worst enemy: their fears,
their desires, their expectations, their ego.

And this applies to all folks, not just those who are insecure like past
me.  It is the same for the person who appears confident or even for
that social media influencer I mentioned earlier.  They all are under
some kind of pressure to conform with standards: they are victims of
expectations.  And they all dread losing what they think they have:
their beauty, their popularity, their success, their social circle, or
whatnot.  What happens if the influencer gets zero attention?  Are they
okay?  They do not admit to aktisia and, therefore, cannot attain ataraxia.

## Be careful with ideals

In conclusion folks, let me return to the theme of what ideals are.  We
don't want to get into the mindset of wanting or hoping for some ideal
to be actualised.  This cannot happen.  Ideals that are formulated with
wisdom are our guide in life.  We use them to make practical decisions
and deal with specific circumstances.  But we know where they belong.

Furthermore, remember what I covered in my previous presentation on "Who
can be a philosopher":
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-07-who-can-be-philosopher/>.  The
key to philosophy is patience.  We cannot have wisdom without being
patient.  We cannot achieve sophistication in haste.  We cannot be
profound while remaining at the level of superficialities.  And so on.
Please check my presentation if you need the details.

The point is that aktisia and ataraxia are concepts that can be misused
as well.  We are imperfect and tend to seek the course of action that
requires the least amount of effort.  We should not commit the error of
thinking that all of sudden we will become an absolutely immovable
object that subsists in perfect harmony.  This is not realistic.

Similarly, we should not have a ceremonial or tokenistic understanding
of those ideas.  If, for example, you throw away your phone you do not
necessarily reach that point of embedding aktisia in your modus vivendi.
Maybe you are working towards that direction, though you need to be
mindful of what the substance is and not remain limited to the
appearances.  What I am saying here is not a glorification or
rationalisation of poverty or the simple life.  To lead a simple life is
but a side-effect of the recognition that we do not own anything.  But
we must get the order right and understand what comes first.

---

In practical terms, let me share a few things about myself, the
insecurities I once had, and how I now operate with aloofness.  Not
confidence, mind you, but aloofness.  Very different.

I used to be afraid to speak in public.  I thought that everyone around
me was a preeminent expert and that somehow I had cheated my way into
their company.  I felt I was an impostor.  I dreaded speaking as I
believed it would expose my presumed charade and that everybody would
then laugh at me for how ignorant I truly was.

It was the same with written communication.  I had to read an email over
and over again to check for typos and to painstakingly explain every
inconsequential detail.  Why?  Because I thought my language skills were
not up to par.  Also, because I did not want to expose what I considered
to be my ignorance.  Again, this feeling of being an impostor.

I only managed to overcome those impediments with my transition to
philosophy.  I became a philosopher through trial and error in life
experiences.  Not books, not formal education.  The short version of the
story is that it was a painful transition, after which I was effectively
remade.

Compare the fearful me to the attitude I have now.  For example, I
started using Emacs three years ago.  In case you don't know, this is a
special program that looks like a text editor but actually is an
integrated computing environment.  I was not a programmer, though I was
indifferent about it and thus had neither fear nor desire.  I was free
from all the burdens, so I started using Emacs and eventually learnt to
be good at it.  Now I maintain all those programs for Emacs.  You see
how this works?

---

Same principle for these philosophy videos.  I am doing them not because
I think I am the foremost expert on any of the topics I have covered.
In fact, I don't have any formal qualification as a philosopher.
Previous me would have been intimidated to ever do this, out of fear of
being branded as a charlatan.  Such is the bias of ownership, of losing
something we think we have.

Yet here I am, aloof with a lightness to my disposition.  I have nothing
to prove, nothing to gain, nothing to lose.  I am merely sharing those
words as others might find them useful for their own life.  And, if
they don't, well&#x2026; I didn't lose anything.

To the question "who do you think you are?" I blithely reply with
"Protesilaos, also known as 'Prot'&#x2014;nice to meet you!"

All this is simple, perhaps deceptively so.  Same as with what I said
before about patience.  That too sounds easy.  But it isn't.  It takes a
lot of work and requires commitment.  Though this is a case of doing the
basic things right.  It's not some deep secret that only the "special
ones" or some elite knows about.

I thus ask you to reflect on your condition.  Think carefully about your
insecurity or your confidence.  Your achievements, your personhood.
Consider all those things you take for granted.  Are they yours?  What
are you afraid of, really?

That's all for today, folks.  Thank you very much for your attention!
