---
title: "Notes on the constitution of the case"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about a general theme in metaphysics with far-reaching implications."
---

1 The study of philosophy pertains to the examination of the abstract
structure inherent to every case.

1.1 The case is a set of factors in their interplay.

1.2 The case is an analytical construct.  Its particularities depend on
which factors are considered and what modal qualities they are thought
to have in light of---or because of---that selection process.

1.3 The case is a _noetic_ presence: a product of thought, not an entity
that is independent of the thinkable.

1.3.1 That which is not noetic is understood in negative terms though
never directly.  For human cannot comprehend that which is not
susceptible to the intellect and/or the sense faculties.

1.3.2 The opposite of noetic is ontic ("on" is Greek for "being"), from
whence comes the study---or the discussion around the probl√©matique---of
"what is": _ontology_.

1.3.3 We describe the mental isolation of patterns as "analytics".  An
"analytical construct" is another way of denoting a noetic presence that
is thought of as if it stood on its own, independent of the totality it
is present in.

1.4 A factor is a constituent of the case.  Factors are noetically
irreducible or analytically atomic ("atom" means "indivisible").

1.5 The relationship between the factors of the case is described as one
of configuration, composition, or constitution.  We thus speak of "the
constitution of the case".

1.6 What stands as a factor in one case can be a set of factors in their
interplay in another case.  A subsystem is a factor of a system yet it
is a system in its own right.  The constitution of the case in each
consideration shall differ.

1.6.1 As pertains to one's disposition, this means that every analysis
must be couched in terms of its scope and remain aware of it.  We call
this the "mode of application", where "mode" refers to a way of
thinking.

1.7 With "presence" we denote existence: a factor in the case.  With
"modality" (and variants like "modal") we refer to the way the presence
is made manifest: how some factor exists or the manner in which its
existence unfolds.

1.8 The presence and modality of a factor is informed by the
constitution of the case, for that involves the interplay of factors and
thus the phenomena specific to it; phenomena germane to the combinations
as such (which we describe as "emergent phenomena").

1.9 A pattern which is discerned only in the interplay of factors,
though not in their isolation as standalone cases, is considered
emergent.

1.10 As the constitution of the case determines the factors in their
interplay and as a case may consist of cases, emergence can be
stratified depending on the scope of each set of relations.

1.11 The "stratification of emergence" describes emergent phenomena that
occur in a composited constitution of the case: a case of cases.

2 Every presence has modality.

2.1 The abstract structure of existence, or else the common in the
multitude of all presences, cannot have modality, for that would be
inherently contradictory.

2.2 Existence without modality is substance.  We name it "Being".

2.3 Being cannot be described as having attributes: the very process
involves the identification of manifest features, i.e. modality.

2.4 Being cannot be understood directly but only through deduction as
that which all presences must have in common.

2.5 The opposite of Being is a product of inference though it cannot
possibly exist as non-Being, since it is impossible for there to be a
present non-presence and, by extension, a pattern that is common in a
multitude of non-presences: "multitude of non-presences" is meaningless,
as is the notion of a pattern in non-presence.

2.6 Every presence partakes of Being.  It shares the substance---that
which is common in the multitude---and then extends it in ways that
particularise the presence, differentiating it from the totality of
presences.

2.6.1 Differentiation pertains to modality.  Even if all appears to be
changing, the abstract structure remains constant: presences still
extend Being.

2.7 There can be no non-Being as that would demand that presences are
extensions of nothingness.

2.8 Presences cannot come from nothing, be in nothing, and move towards
nothing.  A presence comes from something, is in something, and goes
towards something.  Such is a cycle of transfiguration.  The substance
is constant as the abstract structure of all presences is Being, yet the
modality of each presence as well as the effective emergent phenomena
render it subject to change.

2.8.1 The claim that a deity (or any mechanism for that matter) can
create life "from nothing" does not imply non-Being: the god is still
present.

2.8.1.1 A god with personality traits cannot be the same as Being, since
personality is a matter of modality.

2.8.1.2 A god with modal features is a presence.

2.9 Life has to be an alias for the "totality of presences", while
"forms of life" or "life forms" provide alternative ways to denote
presences.

2.10 There can be no non-life, as that would imply that there is
non-Being, which is impossible.  If anything lives, it does so qua
presence; presence which extends Being.  What are understood as birth
and death are apparent phases in an everlasting cycle of
transfiguration.

2.11 All forms of life are consubstantial: they partake of Being.
Transfiguration operates at the modal level of an otherwise constant
underlying substance.

2.11.1 If god is a presence, there can be many gods just as there are
many presences.

2.11.2 All presences are subject to transfiguration.

2.11.3 If god is an alias for Being---substance without modality---there
can still be gods qua presences.  There would be no hierarchy, for that
which lacks a mode of being cannot exist in a relationship of any sort
with presences (hierarchy entails power and control): such a state
entails modality.

2.12 There is no inherently inert, else inanimate, presence.  What is
thought of as inert may contribute to---or already be contributing
to---some form of life that could be perceived as animate provided the
necessary constitution of the case.

2.13 The way a presence is and the way it can be, or else its actuality
and potentiality, are matters that concern the mode of application.
