---
title: "The presumptive idol of you"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about expectations, narratives, and the presumptive idol of you."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "TEarglMbvTw"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  What are idols
2.  Misunderstanding an idol
3.  The relativity of idols
4.  How we are made into idols
5.  We do not control narratives
6.  The invisible person
7.  The invisible and lonely person
8.  The right attitude of honesty

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  In this
presentation, I want to talk to you in philosophical terms about how we
are perceived in interpersonal relations.  What other people think about
us and how their thoughts may differ from our actuality.  We want to
learn more about this possible disconnect and figure out how we may cope
with the relevant challenges.

As you can tell from the title I have chosen, I will elaborate on
presumptions and how our self is perceived in light of them.

This entry expands on some of the themes I have covered in other recent
presentations.  I list the most relevant below for your convenience.
However, you do not need to check those to understand what I am about to
tell you.  This is a standalone publication.

-   Expectations, rules, and role-playing:
    <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-03-expectations-rules-roles/>

-   On selfhood: <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-31-selfhood/>

-   On insecurity, confidence, and aloofness:
    <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-25-insecurity-confidence-aloofness/>

If you are watching this on the video hosting platform, the text I am
reading from is available on my website (check the video's description):
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-30-presumptive-idol/>

## What are idols

The word "idol" is derived from Greek (είδωλο).  It refers to a
representation or image of something.  An idol is a simulacrum of a
certain presence.  A symbol that neatly describes some pattern.

Idols necessarily are simplifications.  Even the most faithful
representation still is a snapshot of whatever reality it captures.
Think, for example, about a photograph that depicts a mountain range.
We can see pine trees, goat trails, snowy mountaintop, an eagle flying
in the distance, and so on.  The photo is faithful to what was happening
in that moment from that perspective, given the camera hardware's
capabilities.  Though the contents of the picture still are not the
actual phenomena that unfolded then and there.

An idol, then, should not be taken in a negative sense.  We use symbols
practically all the time: in language, in our own thinking, in art, and
so on.  Idols are part of our capacity to discern and subsequently
abstract patterns from the totality of all presence, all experiences,
all stimuli.

"Idol" became a smear term that was and is employed by intolerant
fanatics.  Think, for example, about "idolater" and "idolatry".  What
kind of negative emotions do they evoke?  They speak of a person who
worships falsehoods.  These negative connotations are self-righteous,
for they imply that the non-idolaters are the ones who know the truth
and are, perhaps, justified to carry out certain acts of intolerance.

I don't use "idol" in this strictly negative way.  For me, the term has
the original meaning of an image, a representation, a simulacrum, or a
symbol.  This is how I will be using it throughout this presentation.

## Misunderstanding an idol

While faithful idols serve as good approximations of what they
symbolise, we often have to deal with idols that do not correspond to
the underlying reality they depict.  Consider, in simple terms, that a
filter is applied to the camera.  It tints everything towards the blue
side of the colour spectrum.  Suddenly all we see in the picture is
blue-ish.  Though in actuality, we cannot see all this blue: there is no
blue!  It is a distortion produced by the filter and thus captured in
the photograph, else idol, of the scene.

Suppose now, that someone who does not know anything about the contents
of the image has to learn about them through the image.  That is the
only source of relevant information they have.  They will then be
justified in thinking that everything in those scenes is indeed blue.
The point is that idols have the capacity to distort reality.

Imagine a classical Greek statue.  It is an idol of Athena, the Goddess
of wisdom.  Please remember how I use the term "idol".  There is one
person who goes to embrace the statue in the hope of gaining wisdom.
That person misunderstands what the representation is as well as what
wisdom is.  They think that the marble is wise and that touching it will
somehow transfer that quality of wisdom to the person.  It won't happen!

Whereas another fellow sees the same sculpture and recognises in it an
artistic genius, a cultural trope, a historical artefact that might give
us insight into an ancient civilisation, and so on.  It is the same
statue, though it is perceived in profoundly different ways.

We thus realise how symbolism is subjective.  It does not have an
intrinsic meaning that is impossible to misidentify.

## The relativity of idols

Symbols can have a mostly objective meaning or, at least, an underlying
objectivity to them.  For example, when a photograph is a realistic
depiction of a given scene.  Though an agreed-upon meaning is also
possible through culture or some other kind of institutional
arrangement, such as a state edict, or a convention between people.

Think about flags.  Any flag you want.  It has a certain pattern and
uses some colours.  In one context, the flag is perceived as normal and
expected.  In another situation, it is treated as a sign of protest or
pride.  In a third scenario, it is taken as a matter of aggression or
insensitivity.  It still is the same pattern and the same arrangement of
colours and shapes.  But the meaning is a function of who interprets,
the prevailing conditions, and relevant factors in their interplay.

Notice how an idol has narratives associated with it.  When considered
holistically, the idol means so much more than what it represents.  It
is a bundle of actual and potential meanings.  Those narratives are
beyond the control of any given person.  For example, the artist who
produced the sculpture of Athena cannot dictate how others will perceive
of that work of art.  The artist cannot even determine that others will
treat the statue as a work of art.  There is a possibility that someone
sees it as the embodiment of wisdom, or another as some kind of offence
against their own values.

The gist is that the meaning of idols is intersubjective and specific to
the context.  It is relative even when we can all agree to some
objective qualities of it.  We can all tell, for example, that Athena's
statue is made out of stone.  But whether we like what we see or not, is
open to debate.  The representation remains subject to interpretation.

## How we are made into idols

To idolise is to produce a representation out of a certain presence.  We
tend to use "idolise" in the sense of "worship", though I am here
employing the term in its literal meaning: to make an idol, else symbol,
else simulacrum.

We produce an idol out of who we are when we behave in a manner that
conforms with expectations.  We project an image.  We want to look in a
certain way and to be treated accordingly.

Let's consider a practical example, which also shows how the context
matters.  I had a heterosexual male acquaintance who, in my presence,
was an easygoing and funny person.  We would go for drink and have a
relaxed experience.  But, if there were any females around, he would act
as a different person.  No more jokes, none of that cool attitude.  He
wanted to look assertive and dominant.  He would even change his
favourite beverage for something more so-called "manly".

This fellow was idolising himself in the template of the "alpha male".
It is this quasi-scientific stereotype of a sociopath who is supposed to
have leadership qualities and to be sexually attractive to whatever
target gender.  The wannabe alpha males of this world are fundamentally
insecure about their condition.  They need to maintain a facade about
how great they are.  They basically hate themselves.  They do not want
to show their actuality.

So this acquaintance was projecting an idol of himself which, in this
case, was designed to be a misrepresentation of who the underlying
person was.  Even the choice of drink was an elaborate lie.

---

I am not blaming anyone who conforms with such stereotypes.  There are
many prejudices and you are well aware of them.  It's not just the alpha
male.  We have the "good student", the "fine lady", the "hard worker",
the "obedient soldier", the "true patriot", the "nerd programmer", and
so on.  It is not necessarily your fault.  Chances are that you are the
victim of those stereotypes.  You are being objectified and dehumanised,
for it is not the real "you" that people care about, but only the
version of you which conforms with those beliefs.  So the idol of you.
All you want is to fit in.  To be a part of the group.  You desire
attention, recognition, success.  It is how humans tend to behave.  Deep
down, you may just want a hug, assuming your intentions are sincere.

At any rate, what I am saying here is that there is a mechanism in
effect by which a person is turned into a representation of the
underlying human being.  This acquaintance of mine was one type of
character with me and another person altogether when in the midst of
women.  Why was he doing that?  Because he was a coward and a fool.  He
did not want to challenge the status quo, to question the propriety of
those roles.  He was not prepared to assume agency in earnest because he
didn't know who he really was.  He had not yet discovered himself.  He
was still operating on the basis of certain prejudices in the hope of
finding that one hug everybody needs.

Now think of this scenario from the perspective of the females this guy
wanted to attract.  The alpha male is a stereotype that some women are
indoctrinated into liking.  Suppose, then, that my acquaintance did not
behave like a macho man and was instead funny and relaxed.  He would
still be dehumanised in the eyes of those women who dismiss anyone not
in conformance with the alpha male idol.  Perhaps, they would think of
him as childish or as a weakling.  You know how these things work.

## We do not control narratives

The point, then, is the same as with all idols.  They are relative.
There is an interpretive aspect to them.  We are not in control of the
narratives and we cannot determine how other people will think of us or
whatever other phenomenon for that matter.  To their eyes we always are
a combination of what they see and what they evaluate.

My acquaintance is a victim either way.  If he conforms with the alpha
male idol, he is making a fool of himself.  If he is funny and relaxed,
others will judge him accordingly.  The judgement is always there.  What
matters then, is whether we attach value to it or not.

When we want to fit in, we really care about what others think.  We want
to be in good terms with them, because that is the conduit to our
perceived comfort and apparent happiness.  If we do not live up to those
expectations, we lose the relevant benefits.  It is a transaction, a
cost-benefit calculation.

Trying to fit in is difficult.  The opinions of other people are not in
our control.  From our perspective, they are variable.  They are
exogenous, as they originate from the exterior and then enter our
immediate milieu.  We cannot set their value.  As such, when we always
try to conform with the norms, we subject ourselves to the vicissitudes
of public opinion.  Now a certain view finds currency.  In the past,
there was a different view.  In the future, it may be something else
altogether.  Maybe we think we will go with the flow and hope for the
best.  The problem, though, is that we cannot always adapt to those
shifting narratives.  There are cases where we will not fit in and will
stand out as misfits, as failures in some regard, even when we are not
openly criticised for it.

---

Let me tell you about views that we cannot just adapt to on the spot.  I
walk a lot with my dog.  More than 2 hours per day.  People see me and
they recognise me.  Sometimes one will try to talk with me.  They are
curious to learn a few things.  It's common, as this wider region has
small, sparsely populated villages.  Everyone wants to know who the
members of their community are.  So what do they ask?  It's always
personal like "Where is your wife?" and "How many kids do you have?".

I am not exaggerating.  A stranger sees me walking towards a mountain
trail, hits the brakes on their vehicle, and tries to confirm what they
are already assuming as true.  "Of course" I have a wife.  "Of course" I
have kids.  Plural, mind you&#x2014;lots of them, not just one!  In case it
is not obvious, I am being sarcastic.  The answer to those questions is
negative.  Though notice what the expectations are.  These questions
start from a certain position.  They take some things for granted.

If we have the wrong attitude, we will feel disturbed by those intrusive
questions.  We may describe them as insensitive, but merely giving them
a name does not make us any less prone to their effects.  With the wrong
attitude, when we do eventually get those type of questions they will
make us feel inadequate, unfulfilled, manqué.  We will start thinking
that their tacit judgements are correct and internalise the view that we
are flawed in some major way.  We may then experience self-denial which
culminates in self-hatred.  Our selfhood will revolve around those ideas.

We cannot afford to be upset about thoughts people have, because then we
will suffer every time someone holds an inaccurate view.  We will be
annoyed, though still powerless to stop it.  We can try to correct a
person's thoughts, but we simply cannot do that for each and every
opinion in circulation.  We must ultimately admit that we are not in control.

## The invisible person

The examples I have already provided show that at least a part of our
self and out subjectivity is not ours.  It belongs to the minds of other
people.  They interpret what they perceive and they assume things that
may or may not correspond to our actuality.  Even when these assumptions
are wrong, those folks still substantiate our personhood in their thoughts.

For example, the local resident who asks me about wife and kids already
considers me husband and father, respectively.  To their mind, this is
an integral part of who I am.  Extend this to all facets of our
selfhood, to everything that is a characteristic of us, either through
its presence or absence.  Whether it is or isn't&#x2014;and the manner in which
it is or isn't&#x2014;defines us.

The fundamental constraint we have of not controlling the narratives has
a flip-side.  Some parts of our self become inscrutable to others.  They
are inaccessible to them.  This is because they already believe in
certain ideas which obscure whatever we could exhibit.  Our reality,
then, can easily go unnoticed.  The more presumptuous people are, the
more elusive our actuality is for them.  They live with the presumptive
idol of our self and they treat us on the basis of that representation.

If we add together all the presumptions that others have about us, then
we are already starting from a position of undoing beliefs and asking
people to learn things from scratch.  In essence, our truth is invisible
to them and we must make an even greater effort to reveal what we can.
This effort though, cannot be one-sided.  The others need to have the
appropriate disposition of wanting to learn more and, therefore, of
keeping an open mind.  This is not always a given.  As such, any
unilateral measures will prove futile.

---

Let's consider a scenario so that I don't speak in abstract terms.
There is this person who is very attractive.  Everybody has a crush on
them.  This person is judged on the basis of their appearance.  Yes,
good looks have their advantages, which I do not need to elaborate here
as you all know about them.  Though what about the disadvantages?  This
super attractive person is also invisible, because everyone's opinions
revolve around the surface-level features.  It's all about appearances.

One's looks then can produce this paradoxical phenomenon where they
capture the attention of others while simultaneously rendering the
underlying person obscure.  There is no consideration about what that
human being is like beyond appearances.  It's just a pretty face or
whatever.  Every view follows from there.  And the same for appearances
in general.  While they are all about visuals, they actually conceal
things behind layers upon layers of presumptions and biases.

Imagine that this fabled beauty of my example here is actually not
interested in all this attention.  They would like some quietude.  They
cannot simply be relaxed and do how they feel, as everyone treats them
inhumanly as nothing but a pretty face, not as a fully fledged human
being.  They are an object of admiration or desire.  Emphasis on "object".

The real person can suffer greatly from the presumptive idol of their
self.  I mention beauty to show how these things work.  Our culture
places a disproportionate value on appearances.  We are conditioned to
think that "good looks", however defined, are a blessing.  Nothing bad
can come out of them.  In truth, they can be a curse.  Not because there
is anything wrong with one's appearance.  It simply is due to how we do
not control the narratives.  Others will make judgements and we will be
at the receiving of them, either we like it or not.

---

Continuing with this theme.  You may have heard the term "catcalling".
It describes the act of verbal harassment and sexually suggestive
comments that are made in public towards another person.  Females
usually are the targets of such catcalling.

Imagine this.  A female walks down the street and random strangers call
them names, whistle at them, make intrusive or threatening comments, and
so on.  You know what I am talking about.  Did this female ask for any
this?  Or are others being presumptuous and are perhaps feeling entitled
to acquire certain things?

This too is a case where the presumptive idol comes to the fore to haunt
the person.  Not because the person wants.  They are not, by themselves,
in control of the narratives.  You see how this works?  It is not just
about some weird philosopher in the mountains who gets asked about his
ten kids while walking along goat trails.  Everyone is subject to
prejudice, to inane expectations, unsettling standards, inconsiderate
beliefs.

The gist is that the real person is lost to all this cacophony.  The
female who gets catcalled is reduced to an object, with no personality,
no feelings, no interests, no aspirations, nothing!  Whatever sincere
sense of self remains invisible and may, ultimately, be crushed by those
ignorant narratives.

I thus ask you to be more considerate with people.  Don't judge.  Keep
an open mind.  Assume you are wrong.  Tell yourself not to be fooled by
idols.  Recognise that representations are just that and they may be
deceiving.  Admit that the idol of a person is not the actual person.
The world will be a better place with those tweaks to your disposition.

## The invisible and lonely person

Let me now tell you about loneliness.  We have already discussed how
appearances obscure whatever underlying sense of self.  They turn the
person into an idol.  But it doesn't stop there.  One can remain
invisible even when others do not judge them on the basis of their
looks.  This can be due to one's status, for instance.

The "good soldier" is just obedient and, basically, a killing machine or
fodder for the cannons.  The army, the nation, the homeland, or whatever
impersonal agency may be invoked, does not care about who the soldier
is.  It does not want to know whether the person has emotions, talents,
or whatever.  Within the confines of this narrative, the "good soldier"
is not a human.  It's an instrument in the hands of an establishment,
the means to an ulterior end, a pawn in the stratagems of a political
elite.

Again, we have the same mechanics at play.  Expectations condition how
people behave and how they are treated.  The person who is a victim of
their presumptive idol, the person who experiences this "invisibility"
at a deep level, starts to feel marginalised and alone.  Not because
they hate society or that they are awkward and too shy about it.  No!
They may be perfectly happy to be around people.  They are simply forced
to the side by inconsiderate beliefs that beget intolerance, inflexible
standards that deny diversity, and inane stereotypes that twist the
minds of people.

Loneliness is not the same as isolation.  One can feel alone in the
vicinity of others.  Or, even, especially when they are with other
people.

---

Consider my case.  I don't get any attention for my devilish good looks,
or for my ugliness.  People do talk to me though, but they still do not
know who I am.  I am not hiding anything, it's just that they are not
looking for what I can provide.

Here's how it goes.  They start a conversation with me.  I go along with
the flow.  At some point, I will mention something that is conceptual
and does not revolve around my private life or whatever.  It is just a
topic that you don't normally get in small talk.  What I want to do is
to tell the person about who I am.  I am amiable and would like to be
friends with that person.  But the "who I am" is a problem as it does
not correspond to what the other person is expecting.

When your actuality contradicts expectations, others will tend to take a
step back.  In my case, this means that they change the subject.  It is
as if they are running out of oxygen all of a sudden and need to catch a
breath.  They do not engage with what I tell them about.  Not because I
use difficult words or allude to some niche concept that no-one has
heard of.  I never do that!  I might be talking about responsible
handling of dogs in our neighbourhood, for instance, yet the way I do it
requires thoughtfulness; thoughtfulness that others are not used to.

It's not that they are not smart.  But they suddenly feel unsettled.
They belittle themselves as they worry I might judge them or that they
may say something stupid.  I get this a lot with emails as well.  People
will message me and have an introduction which goes along the lines of
asking me to forgive their ostensible ignorance and stupidity.  Please
don't do that.  I don't know things and don't pass judgement.  The
reason I say that you can call me "Prot" is to keep things simple and
make you feel comfortable.  I am as relaxed and stress-free as it gets.

---

Still, the reality is that people do not always believe in themselves.
They have deep-seated fears that something terrible will happen if they
dare speak their mind in earnest and reveal their true colours.  So they
don't do it.  They remain at the surface level where things are thought
to be safe.

For me, however, this results in loneliness.  Every face-to-face
exchange I have must be limited to generic chit-chat that never goes
anywhere.  So even though I am perfectly fine to share more about me, my
thoughts, my interests, my views&#x2026;  I just can't.  It is not possible.
There is no-one ready to listen and to converse with me.

I don't feel sad about this state of affairs because I have no
expectations whatsoever.  Though I do want to understand it better.
There must be idols in effect: these presumptive idols of who I am.
There may be this stereotype that philosophers talk in a language that
others do not comprehend.  Perhaps they also think philosophers are
judgemental and will dismiss anyone who cannot think like them.

None of this is true and I am trying to prove as much through all my
publications.  Sure, there are some difficult concepts and cases where
we need to think about lots of different magnitudes.  Though this
applies to everything in life that involves a degree of sophistication.
At some point things are a bit more challenging.  Though there is no
intent to use language as a way of showing off.  And there is none of
that pretentiousness to appear smart or to fish for compliments.  These
are behaviours that are inconsistent with philosophy: they contradict wisdom.

But I do not control those narratives and I cannot reach people who do
not have the right attitude of overcoming biases.  Hence my loneliness.

## The right attitude of honesty

Let's return to some of the previous examples and I will tie everything
together with what I just explained about loneliness.

Think again about my acquaintance who wanted to be an alpha male in the
presence of women.  In truth, he was being prejudiced about what a woman
even is and what this imaginary figure wants.  Isn't this the same as
someone worrying that they are not smart enough to talk with me?

Consider once more that person who is too beautiful and who has to suffer
the consequences of appearing attractive to everybody else.  That person
is, as I already explained, a victim of the prevailing narratives.
There is a presumptive idol of self made out of their appearance and
this idol takes on a life of its own.  That person can feel lonely, as
well.

Though change the parameters a bit.  Suppose you talk to your crush.  To
this uniquely attractive person.  Is your behaviour the same as with
everybody else?  If not, why not?  Perhaps because you have also made an
idol out of your crush.  You have a representation in your mind which
your imagination has moulded in certain ways.  For as long as you are
not aware of this process of idolisation, you are not really searching
for the fully fledged human being that is concealed behind all those
simulacra.

Extend this principle: imagine that what you are doing by
misunderstanding your crush, is what everybody does.  You then realise
how harsh this reality is on that person.

---

Loneliness comes from being misunderstood and misjudged.  How exactly we
are treated does not really matter for the disconnect to happen.  The
mismatch between our actuality and what the current views about us are,
keeps us in stasis, in a condition that we cannot really escape from.

There is a balancing act to be made between the competing priorities of
expressing ourselves in full or perfectly aligning our conduct with
social norms.  Where that balance is depends on the individual and on
the prevailing conditions.

We are fighting an uphill battle where we constantly need to dispel
presumptuous views.  Though as they keep occurring, we realise that we
are powerless to stop them.  We cannot disentangle ourselves from all
those associations that are made about our idol.  We are essentially
trapped in a situation where we are condemned to never share who we
really are.  No-one is prepared for that eventuality, it seems.

Can we fix this?  How do we remove the pressure of conformity with all
those standards and expectations?  It's not going to be easy.  We have
to acknowledge that this is an interpersonal phenomenon.  Whatever
change has to come about through concerted action.  It cannot be done
unilaterally because no single party owns and controls the narrative.

Unless, then, we can join some kind of movement for raising awareness or
for enacting the requisite reforms, we really cannot do anything to
change what people think.  We must then learn to live with the reality
of no control and be honest about our case.

---

Honesty is not the same as those exhortations parents tell their kids
about not lying.  It primarily is an inward-looking attitude of
recognising how we operate in evolving states of affairs.  For example,
can you admit to yourself that you are idolising your crush?  Are you
prepared to face whatever truth may be hiding behind this little lie of
yours?

Honesty involves awareness of one's condition.  It must be conducted
consistently, in a spirit of dubitativeness and inquisitiveness.  In
other words, it remains open-minded.  It does not stay at the level of
performances; at that initial stage of not "telling lies".  Instead, it
has the rigour and concomitant resolve to delve into the specifics and
to examine the underpinnings or triggers of relevant phenomena.

Honesty consists in discipline.  There isn't a supreme authority, some
boss, for instance, that tells you how things ought to be done and
compels into action.  There is none of that.  In one's private sphere,
honesty can only reveal what the person is willing to discover and what
is rendered perceptible by this very willingness.

It is entirely possible for someone to be formally honest, in the sense
of not telling any lies.  Yet they can still withhold some aspect of the
truth from their self.  This happens by never exiting their comfort zone.

The person always does what has worked for them and never questions
their behavioural pattern and sense of self derived therefrom.  As such,
their experience is conditioned by their comfort zone.  In turn, the
feedback from those actions is proof of the comfort zone's presumed
significance.  Too much comfort may be the sign of complacency, else a
pernicious delusion.

---

To be honest in this disciplined and consistent fashion, one must
ultimately be prepared to disturb their own truths.  We must check and
double-check that whatever presumptive idol of self we have created is
not distorting our reality.  Just remember those photographs with the
blue filter.  There is no blue!  It's all an added effect.

I am being schematic with the photographs to cut the long story short.
We want to focus on our disposition: how we approach things.  On the one
hand, we cannot afford to have this cult of personality where we think
we are perfect and everybody else is a fool.  On the other hand, we
cannot simply presume that others know better and what they say about us
must be true.  There has to be a balance, hence the significance of
being dubitative, of questioning things, and inquisitive, searching for
things.

Through life experiences we learn that what we once took for granted is
now revealed to have been ephemeral and coincidental.  Maybe you grew up
as a cool, popular kid.  You moved countries and suddenly no-one thinks
of you as cool.  What you once believed to be a part of you, was but an
illusion of ownership.  You have to recognise that and challenge your
sense of self.  This is a life-long process.

It is not possible to undo through our own subjectivity what is done
intersubjectively.  We have to recognise what the boundaries are and to
not be emotionally invested in what lies beyond that terminus.  Much
like my loneliness in this place.  There is nothing I can do to change
the innocuous albeit presumptuous attitudes of people.  I can try to
persuade maybe one among them, but even that presupposes some degree of
prior open-mindedness, which simply isn't there for what I am looking
for.

---

Idols will exist, as will all sorts of presumptions.  The key, insofar
as one's subjectivity is concerned, is to maintain the right attitude of
patience and honesty.  We eventually learn to remain aloof and observe
phenomena in third-person view, just as with my case here.

Though we cannot stop there.  Intersubjectivity necessarily brings in
matters of culture and politics.  If we believe that all those idols are
harming lots of people, we need to think about collective action.  We do
not exist in some bubble of subjectivity where we simply disconnect from
the views of others and find solace in our aloofness.  There are
situations where such a state is not possible.

Consider again the example with catcalling.  Can I really tell the
victim that they will philosophise and suddenly all abuse and harassment
will disappear.  No!  That's nonsense.  Everyone can benefit to a degree
from a philosophical disposition, yet the environment must also be
conducive for such an outlook.

Next time you find yourself in an interpersonal situation, try to think
how the other side feels.  What are the expectations they have to meet
and did they ever have a say in that matter?

Make an effort to let go of your fears and prior judgements.  People
will always be invisible to those who are not ready to see.  It takes a
lot of courage to be honest and to give the other person a chance to
reveal their humanity.

Take it easy.
