---
title: "Expectations, rules, and role-playing"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about expectations, rules, and role-playing."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "y4J0am9VWqs"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  Definitions
2.  Banal expectations as predictions
3.  When value judgements are relevant
4.  Cultural expectations as rules
5.  Roles and their impact on selfhood
6.  Expectations, stereotypes, and selfhood
7.  The dynamic between structure and agency
8.  The act of role-playing
9.  How to handle cultural expectations
10. Propitious growth starts with minute changes

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  In
today's presentation I will talk to you about philosophical themes that
apply to our everyday social interactions.  This covers notions such as
peer pressure, conformity with rules, and stereotypes.

We want to learn how they affect us and whether we can do something to
cope with them.  The idea is to understand what expectations are, how
they influence our sense of self, focus on the downsides that may
trouble people without implying that there are no upsides, and then
discuss how we may deal with them.

The present entry builds on what I talked about in my last two
publications in this series.  In particular:

-   **Ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism:** <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-16-ataraxia-moderation-mysticism/>.

-   **Conventions, relativism, and cosmopolitanism:** <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-21-relativism-cosmopolitanism/>.

I encourage you to study what I have already covered, though it is not
strictly necessary for understanding what I am about to elaborate on.
If I make a reference to a concept that I have elucidated before, I will
try to briefly explain it in context.

The text of this presentation will be available on my website:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-05-03-expectations-rules-roles/>.

## Definitions

These are terms I will be using throughout the presentation.  It is
important to clarify what I mean at the outset in order to avoid any
misunderstandings.

-   **Expect/Expectations:** To expect is to hold views, opinions, hopes
    about the outlook of a given state of affairs.  Interestingly, the
    corresponding Greek verb (προσδοκώ==prosdoko) consists of *pros* meaning
    towards (or "outlook" more broadly) and *doko* which is related to
    loanwords in English like doxastic and dogma, which all involve the
    meaning of belief, opinion, perspective.  Similarly, the Latin
    etymology for *exspectare* contains the meaning of "spectate", which can
    be interpreted as a view or perspective and, by extension, opinion and
    belief.

-   **Autonomy (αυτονομία):** Self-rule or self-determination in the sense
    of setting an order for oneself.  Here the "self" is not necessarily
    an individual as groups can also govern themselves collectively
    through concerted action.  Note that the "-nomy" term pertains to the
    word for law (νόμος==nomos), which connotes human affairs via a
    distinction between law and nature.  In my last presentation I
    employed the term chremata to denote things with a use-value as
    opposed to pragmata&#x2014;things as they are.  I think this is language is
    better as it helps us avoid formulations like "law of nature", which
    would otherwise be confusing.

-   **Heteronomy (ετερονομία):** The opposite of autonomy.  It means rule by
    an other (hetero==other, opposite, different).  The "other" in this
    case can be an outside force, individual or group, or it may even be
    one's own order which is perceived as having an external source or
    dimension.  If, for example, a government enshrines in its
    constitution an immutable provision about its expenditure, it
    effectively becomes heteronomous with respect to said provision by
    alienating its authority from the law it created: when conditions
    demand that expenditure be increased, the government will not be able
    to revise its own law, as that would technically be illegal.

---

-   **Agent [of action]:** One who acts or who has the capacity of action.
    A person or group thereof with the potential of initiative.

-   **Agency:** Encapsulates everything that pertains to the agent.  It can
    also imply a normative view of what "initiative" denotes: such as
    action that is never controlled by another entity and is thus
    autonomous.  As such, one is said to "assume agency" when they are
    thought to escape from a state of heteronomy.

-   **Structure:** The instituted environment within which the agent
    operates.  An environment that consists of arrangements with an
    underlying use-value (i.e. chremata).  From the perspective of a
    singular agent, structure is exogenous to them: it cannot change
    simply by the agent's own volition or machinations.  The "structure"
    is a metaphor, as it does not reference an edifice.  It describes the
    factors which remain outside the agent's control, while hinting at
    their layered or multifaceted complexity.  We will see how "structure"
    can simply reference "other agents".

-   **Role:** The scope of the agent's action within the structure.  It
    captures everything the agent can do and everything the agent is
    expected to do.

## Banal expectations as predictions

Each of us has expectations about common things in their life.  They are
inevitable because we do not operate with complete knowledge and perfect
foresight.  The human condition unfolds in imperfect circumstances where
we must fill in the gaps of our knowledge with estimates, guesswork,
hopes, or faith in order to cope with evolving challenges or demands.

For instance, while I was writing this presentation, I was expecting to
be able to record and publish it without complications.  As I am
recording this video right now, my hope is that the power supply will
not fail me and I will get the job done.  What ensures as much?

Expectations of this sort are justified.  They are based on prior
knowledge and are specific to a set of data.  We are assuming that a
discrete pattern is constant or that the chance of it being repeated is
high because experience dictates as much.  Given the apparent
likelihood, we make a prediction about the outlook of what we already
know.  Continuing with my example, it is normal for my house to have a
stable supply of electricity.  As such, I hold this will continue to be
the case now that I am recording the present footage and later when I
will eventually publish it.

There is nothing in the nature of things that renders necessary the
prevailing conditions which frame my current activity.  What I mean is
that my prior knowledge does not guarantee insight into the future
developments specific to this state of affairs.  The power supply, for
example, is not truly a given.  Something might happen which will lead
to shortages or interruptions: human error, hardware failure, economic
hardship, a natural calamity, et cetera.  I just hope and believe that
the chance of a downturn is marginal, based on what I already know.

## When value judgements are relevant

The fact that expectations are beliefs is not bad per se.  I am not
making a value judgement.  It simply is an admission that the human
experience involves actions that unfold in sub-optimal circumstances
where full knowledge of all factors of the case is not available.  In
other words, I am not making an appraisal of the fact that expectations
exist, because my opinion about it does not alter it.

Judgement calls are relevant for those items whose presence and/or
actuality is contingent on the human factor.  Otherwise, opinions on
what is good or bad, acceptable or not, are pointless: we cannot achieve
anything by saying that "it is unacceptable for the Sun to luminate the
Earth" since the workings of the Solar system do not depend on our
views.

This is related to what I explained at length in my previous
presentation regarding *chremata* (as opposed to *pragmata*).  We want
to draw a distinction between items that depend on human involvement
(i.e. chremata) and those which are in effect regardless of what humans
think about them (pragmata).

With this basic idea in mind, we are better prepared to understand
expectations in their intersubjective formulation as social and cultural
phenomena.  They are chremata, meaning that they have a use-value that
can, under certain conditions, be interpreted in a new light or
altogether reconsidered and abolished.  By the end of this presentation,
we will see how this insight can help us cope with the demands of norms
that apply to us.

## Cultural expectations as rules

The examples I offered earlier concern a person who makes predictions
about the future based on the available information or data.  Those are
empirical observations that are consistent with a scientific
disposition.  There are, however, expectations which are developed
through interpersonal relations in present time and from one generation
to the next.  Expectations can thus be intersubjective, else cultural.
These are not limited to minute data points and are not specific to the
particularities of a case.  As such, they are further away from science.

Cultural expectations take the form of rules of conduct or unwritten
instructions which regulate how agents should behave in a given
situation.  While they may have a modicum of what appears to be a
predictive function, they typically are directives which outline how
people should conduct themselves regardless of the underlying dynamics.
Such rules are, in this regard, decoupled from the context that led to
their original formulation: the link between a datum and an inference is
either weakened or lost.

Cultural expectations are geared towards shaping the future instead of
merely predicting it, by moulding the behaviour of people.  Rules can be
enforced through coercion, though they typically take the form of
quotidian narratives which impress upon each person a sense of how they
must think about their place in their social milieu: how they fit in and
what are the qualitative features of their sense of belonging.

For example, what does it mean for a woman to have a "lady-like"
demeanour?  Why are certain career paths considered "manly" and who is
supposed to be a "man" and, conversely, a "non-man" in this scenario?
Why is it claimed to be a righteous duty to participate in a war of
aggression in the name of the homeland even if the regime which claims
the homeland as its own domain is unjust throughout?

These are all constructs which are underpinned by the shared beliefs of
individuals in a given culture or community.  They are not so much
predictions about the future but commands or exhortations on what
subsequent states of affairs ought to look like.  They thus delimit
roles which govern who has agency in a given context and what it
entails.

---

Cultural expectations are sweeping generalisations.  They are not based
on the merits or particular qualities of the person they are directed
towards or apply to.  Rather, they prescribe how any person that broadly
falls within a certain class has to conform with the applicable cultural
construct.

When, for example, a woman is told to act in a lady-like fashion and
thus conform with the `lady` construct, she is not treated as her own
person.  Her individuality is not accounted for.  Her peers do not yet
consider whether she has a sense of humour or not, what her hobbies are,
which traits of character are dominant in her disposition and how those
influence her relations with others and perception of events, what sort
of opinions and preferences she has, and so on.  None of this matters
insofar as the expectation of conformity with the cultural construct of
`lady` is concerned.  The woman must behave like a lady, else, the tacit
threat is, suffer the consequences of non-conformity with the rule.

Cultural expectations thus have, perhaps inadvertently, a dehumanising
function, as they ignore all those qualitative features of an individual
which render them who they are.  What the rules deal with are classes of
people, each of which has attributes specific to it; attributes that are
loosely discernible in individuals.  Classes can cover factors such as
age, gender, career, place of birth, annual income, physical appearance,
and so on, or they can be situational such as "anyone wearing a hat
inside a building".

Dehumanisation, or what effectively is the abstraction of individuality,
may sometimes be inconsequential.  Such as being asked to take off your
hat when entering a certain establishment.  Though dehumanisation can
have invidious effects on those affected, depending on the specifics.
In the example of the `lady` construct, a woman who is pressured to
conform with the role might feel disrespected, humiliated, stressed, and
generally not well.  If conformity with the expectation is inflexible,
the dehumanising function is likely to be detrimental to those who are
assuming the given role contrary to their will or ability.

---

Continuing with this theme of cultural expectations as rules&#x2026;

In contradistinction to expectations with a predictive function, rules
try to determine future outcomes through interference with the relevant
states of affairs.  To press on with my example, for a woman to
ultimately behave in a lady-like fashion and be treated as such, she and
her peers must be indoctrinated in a given tradition that impresses in
their mind the applicable rules of conduct as matters of necessity or
utmost significance.  This is where the rule-as-narrative is made
manifest, for it is normalised through upbringing or initiation instead
of being presented as an edict.

Indoctrination, or otherwise the cultivation of a certain mindset, has
the effect of propagating cultural norms.  Agents who assume their role
unwittingly think of their self as embodying that role.  Continuing with
our example, a woman may not feel pressured to behave as a lady because
that has always been her normality.  She might even be judgemental of
other women who do not meet the implied criteria.

Propagation of cultural expectations has the effect of engendering peer
pressure.  Put simply, the rules take a life of their own.  Those who
already behave in accordance with their role influence others to do the
same and the phenomenon becomes widespread.  Societies thus develop
mechanisms for their own reproduction and persistence of cultural
constructs: culture has an intergenerational reach where the original
connection between some datum and the inferred belief is lost or no
longer as relevant.

## Roles and their impact on selfhood

If a person conforms with cultural expectations in everything they do,
they eventually develop an impression of selfhood which is moulded by
those expectations.  Their sense of self coincides with the set of
significations that are fastened upon the cultural construct that
informs their assortment of roles.  In this regard, they no longer think
of expectations as rules about how people should behave, but as part of
what is normal and&#x2014;a misused word here---*natural*.

Individuals thus model their conduct after their assigned role.  They
also gauge their performance vis-à-vis the cultural construct.  For
instance, a man sets out to "put food on the table", because manliness
may require as much.  A man who does not do so or who earns less than
his wife might think he is not a "true man" or manly enough.  The
implications can be devastating for the person but also for their
relationship with their spouse.

Similarly, a person in their 30s who is not in a relationship, has never
married, and has no children may fall in to a crisis of questioning what
is wrong with them.  In truth, nothing is wrong.  The person might feel
defective in some way for not having found their much-touted "other
half" and for not possessing what it takes to make a family.  The
perceived problem stems from the mismatch between the normative state of
affairs formed by cultural expectations and the person's actuality.
Because expectations are sweeping generalisations, it is not the
person's fault that their particularities are not accounted for.

The purpose of these examples is to show how cultural expectations have
a profound impact on one's sense of self.  When we try to answer the
question "who am I?", we do so in relation&#x2014;or juxtaposition&#x2014;to
experiences and stimuli, which include those cultural constructs either
explicitly or implicitly.  Selfhood is neither fixed nor predetermined.
It is a variable that must be understood in its given social-cultural
context in light of the individual's particularities.  Apart from
selfhood though, which sounds abstract, expectations can influence how a
person perceives of their appearance.  Think of beauty standards: people
develop all sorts of insecurities about how they look and become
apologetic about some perceived defect of theirs.  Same principle.

## Expectations, stereotypes, and selfhood

Here is a story about my beard which relates to the aforementioned
reference to appearances.  Someone once described me as having "North
African or Middle Eastern looks".  They followed it up with a remark on
my facial hair: "people might think you are a terrorist".

This is obviously racist, though I want to consider it dispassionately
in light of what I have discussed in this presentation.  The allusion to
these presumably inappropriate looks of mine hints at a stereotype.  A
stereotype is the substance of an effective rule, as it constitutes a
sweeping generalisation that applies to a class of people regardless of
their particularities.  If you have certain physical characteristics,
the thinking goes, you must be this, that, and the other, and ought to
behave in such and such ways.

Sometimes it is impossible to avoid the invocation of a stereotype, as
we have to operate in imperfect circumstances.  In their most basic and
innocuous form, stereotypes are mental shortcuts we use to glean
information about an individual or group thereof we know nothing or
precious little about.  Nevertheless, and despite sincere intentions,
stereotypes are unreliable and we should be careful with them.

The problems with the reliance on stereotypes become evident when we do
not receive the feedback we had anticipated.  If someone does not meet
our expectations, as informed by the stereotype, we are conditioned to
reprimand them with what effectively amounts to "why aren't you the way
I want?".  Kind of how this person was trying to tell me that I must
have a certain appearance in order to fit in.

The implication is that failure to conform with the established
standards would make others think of me as ugly, or inadequate, or
faulty in some profound way.  And aren't we inclined to think that if
everyone has the same opinion, it likely is true?  Meaning that I could
eventually internalise their thoughts and make them my own.  From whence
insecurities come from.  This is a case of compounding expectations:
layered beliefs about the outlook of a state of affairs.  People hold a
stereotypical view and have opinions surrounding it which ultimately
dictate which expressions of selfhood are tolerable in their midst.

## The dynamic between structure and agency

We have already discussed how expectations can influence the impression
of one's selfhood and how societies reproduce themselves by propagating
cultural constructs by embedding them as narratives.  Against this
backdrop, we can reason about the "structure" I mentioned in my
introductory section on the definitions pertinent to this presentation.
To refresh your memory:

> -   **Structure:** The instituted environment within which the agent
>     operates.  An environment that consists of arrangements with an
>     underlying use-value (i.e. chremata).  From the perspective of a
>     singular agent, structure is exogenous to them: it cannot change
>     simply by the agent's own volition or machinations.  The "structure"
>     is a metaphor, as it does not reference an edifice.  It describes the
>     factors which remain outside the agent's control, while hinting at
>     their layered or multifaceted complexity.  We will see how "structure"
>     can simply reference "other agents".

Think about the nexus of all the applicable cultural expectations.  They
have a profound effect on how people lead their lives.  For example, if
my beard makes me look like a terrorist, employers will be hesitant to
give me a job as such an association is bad for business.  I might be
able to reason with an individual, but I ultimately cannot control the
minds of people and cannot convince everyone that their stereotype is a
pernicious falsehood.  More so if a job application gets rejected on
looks alone or, more generally, if I am dismissed in advance.

---

This is exactly what I mean by "exogenous".  The structure is not a
function of a subjective disposition or behaviour: from the perspective
of a given agent, the structure is external to them.  The agent of
action must then make some potentially difficult choices.  Either adapt
to the structure and operate within its confines, or insist on the
realisation of their agency and live with the consequences.

The former option contributes to the reproducibility of culture: people
become what the rules demand.  The latter choice of marking one's own
path might seem unsustainable and often is, though we must not forget
that the structure is a metaphor.  When we are dealing with culture and
expectations, we ultimately have to do with human beings.  Attitudes,
preferences, and beliefs are not necessary conditions that never change.
They can be considered anew.

While the structure appears as exogenous when seen from the perspective
of an individual agent, it is not exogenous to the society as a whole
insofar as its cultural dimension is concerned.  For the society,
"structure" encompasses the totality of agents in their
context-dependent roles (actual or potential) and their concomitant
expectations.

The structure has a temporal aspect to it which can be discerned at the
macro view of the social whole but may be imperceptible at the micro
scale of a single agent.  Over the short-term, the structure appears as
robust to shocks: it is immutable.  Over the long-term though, it does
change to reflect the set of beliefs that find currency among the
members of the society as these relate to the prevailing conditions in
their milieu.

---

This creates an interesting dynamic between structure and agency.  For a
single individual, the structure includes other people as they are the
ones who propagate cultural constructs through their behaviour and the
peer pressure they apply to those they socialise with.  Yet if groups of
individuals with common goals are formed, then the notion of "the other
people" progressively loses its weight as a collective agency now
redraws the lines of what is and isn't acceptable.

The collective agency is a macroscopic, emergent phenomenon, which is
underpinned by the concerted or coinciding efforts of individual agents
of action.  For example, if beards become trendy and, for whatever
reason, no-one is judged any more on the basis of their looks, the idea
that facial hair is the marker of a terrorist will be broadly considered
preposterous.  Similarly, if women defy the prescriptions of what it
means to be a lady, the `lady` construct will cease to be relevant, at
least in its current form.  If men stop acting all manly, whatever
manliness entails, then the `man` construct will change.  And so on.

The gist is that everything with an intersubjective value&#x2014;all
*chremata*, to re-use the term from my previous presentation&#x2014;can be
thought of as different.  This is not to suggest that change is easy but
to simply remark that it is possible.

[ The term "chremata" is discussed at length here:
  <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-21-relativism-cosmopolitanism/> ]

## The act of role-playing

As I have already noted, the structure appears as fixed from the
perspective of a single agent.  This means that there are cases where a
person cannot afford to go against the prevailing norms and must instead
conform with them.

Every rule delimits the boundaries of a role.  Roles typically are
predicated on generalisations that do not account for the
particularities of the individuals they apply to.  Some roles are
global, meaning that they hold force in all possible cases, while others
have a local scope of being relevant only in a given environment.

As individuals want or need to fit in to their society, they inevitably
have to reconfigure an aspect of their agency by assuming roles.
Suppose you are an introvert.  If your friends call you to parties, you
are pressured to accept their invitations even though you do not like
such gatherings.  The reasons you feel compelled to accept their
invitations will vary: it can be because you fear you might be
marginalised if you opt for an alternative and/or worry that your
friends will become passive aggressive if you always decline their
invitations, such as if they tell you "it is okay that you don't like us
anymore".  To avoid trouble, you do something against your inclinations.

In this example, the introvert who would rather do something else must
act in a manner that makes them feel uncomfortable just so they retain
their acquaintances and maintain the appearance of fitting in to the
social group.

Roles can form part of a continuum.  For instance, a person who behaves
as a model professional may not afford the luxury of being seen as
comparatively irresponsible in another context, as that may spill over
to their image as a professional.  If reputation is important for a
certain job, losing it is not a viable option.  Roles can thus be
compounded to form complex sets of expectations.

Role-playing must be understood as an act that confers privileges but
also comes with considerable constraints on how the agent may express
their underlying selfhood.

---

What happens now if an agent is not aware they are performing in
accordance with a role?  What if the underlying rule is so deeply seated
in culture that it is taken to be the natural order instead of some
human-made arrangement?  Does the person see themselves as engaged in
role-playing, or are they simply believing to be who they seem to be?

There is a latent chance that one will behave in a manner that is
consistent with a role even after they know that the role is not a
natural condition.  Rules are not necessarily arbitrary, even though
they are sweeping generalisations.  There can be a kernel of truth to
them which happens to match what an agent is doing.  Still, it is
possible that a person feels an underlying conflict they cannot
elucidate and eventually resolve, as they have yet to realise they are
involved in role-playing that contradicts their inclinations.

Consider the case of motherhood.  Cisgender women above a certain age
are expected to have children.  When they are in social gatherings or in
a family reunion, they are always reminded about it.  Those who do not
conform with the cultural expectations may have a hard time explaining
themselves.  They may not be able to reason with others that a woman is
not defined as a baby-making device and, by extension, may struggle to
express their individuality in such a milieu.

For another example, think about the conscientious professional who is
consistently efficient at their job.  Everyone praises them for their
ability and, over time, these views calcify as higher standards that the
agent must unconditionally meet.  If the professional performs below the
lofty standard they have set for themselves, they run the risk of being
seen as slacking off and may be penalised for their perceived laziness.
This shows that role-playing can be developed organically in a given
context to cover relative magnitudes and impose ad-hoc conditions on
those involved.

## How to handle cultural expectations

Sometimes rules are enforced coercively as they form part of an
oppressive structure.  In such cases, the impetus for thoroughgoing
reform can only come from sustained resistance to the established order.
Rebellions or revolutions are not easy, though there arrives a moment in
history where they pose the only viable alternative to the status quo.

When it comes to non-militant methods of coping with cultural
expectations, we start from the recognition that rules are chremata.
They are the product of human institution; they are made the way they
are and can, in principle, be remade differently.  This means that the
structure is not immutable: rules are neither definitive nor absolute.

Despite this fact, we still find ourselves in situations where we must
make compromises and establish priorities.  It is not always feasible to
defy the norms and do what we really want, even if that seems
reasonable.  So what kind of attitude can we assume to deal with these
realities without forcing ourselves into submission or going to extremes
that could have adverse effects?  Below is a non-exhaustive list:

-   Learn to pick your battles and not be pedantic.  There are cases where
    standing up for a principle is not worth the effort.  For example, you
    might argue that there is nothing in the nature of things that demands
    we take off our hat while entering a building.  Fighting over such an
    inconsequential issue only cements your reputation as an eccentric
    fellow which, in turn, undermines your cause on non-trivial matters as
    it creates negativity that will be directed against you.

-   The flip-side of not being pedantic is to understand what the bigger
    picture is.  Pedantry in the wrong context is the sign of a fool.  Try
    to identify the wider patterns and analyse how they affect you and
    others in their daily life.  A sense of perspective helps you grasp
    what matters and lets you forward your cause with greater effect.

-   Stop being your worst enemy.  You are not the centre of the world.
    Sometimes the peer pressure is not the real problem, as we tend to
    aggrandise in our mind what is otherwise a minor affair.  Whenever you
    internalise people's views or dwell on the imaginary opinions of
    others, answer in earnest: do they really care all that much?

---

-   Do not always prioritise the comfort of others when doing so comes at
    your own discomfort.  Recall the example of our introverted fellow who
    is compelled to go to parties despite their strong preference not to
    attend them.  Forcing yourself to be someone else does not necessarily
    turn you into someone else: it leaves you in an awkward state instead.

-   Make your feelings known and don't be afraid to appear vulnerable.  If
    you are concerned that your nature will alienate your acquaintances
    then question whether they truly are worth having.  Being amiable for
    the sake of amiability can only work against you, as you will never
    attract sincere friends.  Part ways with them in peace, if you must.

-   Never apologise for who you are when there is nothing you can do about
    it.  For instance, physical characteristics such as height and
    complexion are outside our control.  When we pretend otherwise, we lie
    to ourselves and maintain the kind of fakery that attracts impostors.

-   There seldom is a perfect moment to flee from an abusive role-playing
    affair.  If you wait for the world to change before you make a move,
    you will likely live your years miserably in a state of heteronomy.

-   Genuine courage is contagious.  You might think that everyone is
    content with their role, though the facade is deceptive.  When a
    person assumes agency, others will do the same.  The cumulative effect
    of such alterations at the micro level will ultimately be discerned at
    the macro scale as a shift in the structure.

-   Champion your autonomy with restraint.  Through experience you learn
    more about yourself and no longer need the validation of others to
    pursue your interests.  If you need to mimic someone else just to fit
    in, you find yourself in a state of heteronomy.  If, on the flip-side,
    you go to great lengths to prove trivial points (like being pedantic),
    you are unreasonable and will ultimately not get what you want.

-   One's self is not a dogma nor a cult.  Selfhood is neither fixed nor
    predetermined and should never be a cause for heteronomy.  Do not
    hesitate to revise what you do and who you are.  To deviate from one's
    past from a position of knowledge is the sign of a person who values
    the truth; the truth as made available in the prevailing conditions.

## Propitious growth starts with minute changes

In conclusion, folks, we need to remain calm in the face of a social
order that we cannot control.  There are difficulties and there will be
moments during which we think that the world can never change.  However,
chremata are subject to review.  Something is better than nothing.  What
is touted as normal&#x2014;responsibility towards friends and family, gender
roles, duty to serve the homeland which actually is the state,
etc.&#x2014;are all matters of convention.  Conventions are not necessarily
bad.  Though the mere fact of their presence is not proof that they are
good either, let alone relevant under the present circumstances.

Remember the triplet of maxims passed to us from ancient Greece,
specifically the temple of Apollo in Delphi that I discussed in my
presentation about *ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism*:

-   Know yourself;
-   Nothing in excess;
-   Ensure, ruin follows (certainty brings calamity).

Based on what I have covered today, knowing yourself requires that you
take a step back from your routines and consider how your selfhood is
informed, framed, influenced, or otherwise determined by the structure
that conditions your agency.  When you behave in a certain way, is it
really your genuine self that is being expressed, or are you merely
staging a play in pursuit of some fleeting reward?

Avoiding exaggerations demands that you identify your midpoint by
learning more about who you are in relation to the rest of the world.
If, for example, you always try to please others at your own expense,
you are being an extremist.  Same if you are egotistical and never
empathise with those around you.  There has to be a balance.

A healthy dose of doubt will keep you in check and save you from picking
fights that are not worth the risk or trouble.  Certainty also implies
an overestimation of your own abilities.  Be aware of what you can and
cannot do.  Cultural reforms start with small changes but require the
emergence of a collective agency to turn into grand redesigns.  If you
fail to recognise this insight, if you are sure that you can change the
world all by yourself, you will only find ruin.
