---
title: "The private and the political"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about private and public spheres in relation to politics."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "oWFF9vCzLbI"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  The meaning of Ecos and Polis
2.  The instituted reality of the polis
3.  The quasi-permanence of institutions
4.  Rules, roles, and expectations
5.  Politics will find you
6.  The false dichotomy of individual VS collective
7.  Balancing the good of the place and the space

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  In this
video I will talk to you about philosophical themes that relate to
private and public spheres.  I will try to explain what those are and
how each of us may understand their selfhood within their boundaries.

The reason I cover this topic is because some of my recent presentations
have revolved around matters of subjectivity and individuality.  I have
always mentioned the social and cultural magnitudes, but I never
explained in clear terms how politics is relevant in this regard.  I
want to help you better understand what I have already covered and,
hopefully, give you some new ideas to think about.

Before we go any further: my concept of "politics" in this context is
theoretical and abstract.  I will not dwell on what politician X did and
how journalist Y reported on it.  While this sort of information is
useful in certain situations, it is not needed to understand the bigger
picture of our human condition.  Philosophy is all about this general
appreciation of things; of finding the common in the multitude.

The key insight from this presentation is that we cannot fully withdraw
from politics and live in our own little bubble.  There has to be a
balance between private and public affairs.

The text I am reading from is available on my website.  If you are
watching this on the video hosting platform, you will find the link in
the description: <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-09-09-private-political/>.

## The meaning of Ecos and Polis

Let's start with a couple of Greek words that apply to this topic and
which I will be referencing throughout my presentation.

-   **Ecos, or oikos, or oekos (Οίκος):** It literally means one's home.
    This is the root term we find in words such as economics, ecology,
    ecosystem.  All those retain the original meaning of "home",
    "habitat", or "household".
    
    Consider how eco-nomos, where "nomos" (νόμος) means "rule", is the set
    of rules&#x2014;and implied mechanics&#x2014;that ultimately apply to the
    management of the household's affairs.  In economics, the "household"
    can denote a number of things.  We would normally classify it as a
    private actor at the microscopic level, such as an individual or a
    business, as well as a literal household.  Though we could also think
    of macroscopic matters as pertaining to our "habitat" at-large, such
    as how inflation, which is an economy-wide phenomenon, is affecting
    each of us in our "house".  So the meaning of "ecos" is conveyed
    correctly.
    
    Same principle for ecology, the discussion about our habitat, and
    ecosystem, the interconnected factors that are relevant to our living
    space.  Ecos, then, is not limited to the physical house, as in the
    actual building that we currently occupy.  It is the *place* we live in
    as well as the *space* within which our existence is made possible.

---

-   **Polis (Πόλης):** This literally means "city" though it also describes
    the affairs that people have in common in some structured way in a
    given point of co-location.  We can infer as much from the fact that
    the city is indeed constructed by humans to serve as their habitat.
    The origin of the city consists in some kind of intervention and
    deliberate action to bring about a state of affairs that differs from
    what we would get in the jungle, for example.
    
    The city is structured not just literally but also figuratively as a
    bundle of rules that govern how phenomena within its boundaries are to
    unfold.  There are provisions for every aspect of life within the
    city.  Which are the working hours and for what kind of professions.
    Whether there are roads and what sort of code of conduct applies to
    their usage.  The organisation of labour and the concomitant
    distribution of resources.
    
    We then realise that the polis is a blend between the physical
    dimension of actual buildings and roads and such designs as well as
    normative or intangible systems that inform, frame, condition, or
    otherwise determine the context-specific behaviour of relevant classes
    of people.
    
    It then is no surprise that we have derivative terms such as politics
    and polity.  The former describes the matters of the polis, while the
    latter signifies the instituted order that pertains to a given
    phenomenon or state of affairs.  The polis, thus, encompasses the
    meaning of ecos.  It adds to it this important qualification of being
    a human-made construction and of embedding all those inventions we
    call norms.

---

Both ecos and polis imply the notion of *space*.  They are not strictly
private and cannot be realised in a vacuum.  Our natural habitat, for
instance, does not have a standalone presence, even if we live on our
own in the most rudimentary way possible, such as on a tree.  There
always exists a wider system that envelops our own milieu.  What we have
is a subsystem of this supersystem.  We call it the ecosystem, which is
a system of systems.

All living organisms affect, in one way or another, how our life will
be.  The trees, the insects, the birds, the forests, the mountains, the
oceans, the moon, the sun&#x2026; they are all relevant to our actuality.  We
cannot live without trees, for example, and trees rely on mycelium,
insects, and birds, and so on.  Our existence in our home is one of
co-existence with other forms of life.  Our presence in this world is a
joint presence.  We are all interdependent.  Again, the ecos is the
space, not just the place, not just "rugged individual me" living in a
cave at the end of a goat trail in some mountains.

The space is more clearly expressed through the meaning of the polis
because here we understand that we are dealing with connections between
people and with phenomena that involve classes of individuals.  The
polis is not limited to what happens within one's own walls because of
this broader dimension it has, though I shall tell you how even your own
locality is not strictly private.  But more on this later.

To be clear, emphasis on the significance of the space is not some
hippie theory of someone who goes around hugging trees.  Talking about
the ecosystem and understanding those matters of coexistence and
interdependence has always been part of what the discussion about the
ecos is about.

## The instituted reality of the polis

The word "institution" is a noun with a dual meaning:

1.  It refers to what has been set up as a node in the political order.
2.  It describes the process of establishing such a node.

Nodes are major points in a network of connections that influence
specific affairs.  For example, family is an institution.  Each society
or culture, has a specific understanding of what constitutes a family
and which are the relevant rules for it.

Institutions are products of human conduct and invention.  They are not
natural laws.  In one culture, people may consider private property
sacrosanct.  In another culture, private property is thought of as
misguided egoism.  It does not matter who is right and who is wrong
based on which criteria.  When we are doing philosophy and notice that
there are disagreements or points of deviation, we can only express with
confidence the view that we are not sure about it and that whatever
state of affairs is relative to certain factors.  In other words, we
remain inquisitive and dubitative.

The polis and, by extension, the affairs of the polis&#x2014;politics&#x2014;are
always framed in accordance with institutions or take place as part of a
process of institution, of setting up nodes in the political order.
Everything in the polis is instituted as such.  What it means to have a
certain gender.  Which is the age of adulthood.  Who governs.  How is
work organised and who gets what out of it.  Which rules are relevant to
the household, the workplace, the park, and so on.  All these are
institutions throughout.

---

Institutions are implemented to codify certain beliefs, values, or
functions as quasi-permanent.  Think, for example, about the institution
of the parliament.  It is a physical building but also a figment of the
legal order.  The parliament has specific duties and a certain role in
the governance of the country.  Though it also embodies values and
opinions, such as the normative view that this polity should operate in
such and such ways.  The "should" is, as I said, not an objective
reality.  It is substantiated in the given culture.

An institution is quasi-permanent because nothing in politics is
absolutely permanent.  Everything that is instituted can be
re-instituted.  This is part of what I explained at great length in my
presentation about "Conventions, relativism, and cosmopolitanism":
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-21-relativism-cosmopolitanism/>.
There I introduced two concepts, namely *pragmata* and *chremata*, which
help us better understand what is subject to institution and what is not.

The point for us now is that institutions are, strictly speaking,
relative.  In the image of an institution we discern a set opinions,
concepts, aspirations of those who brought it into being or, anyhow,
contributed to its current state.  When we examine the institution of
the parliament, for example, we identify therein the principles of the
separation of state functions and of checks and balances (among others).

Institutions cannot be value-free.  They cannot be objective in the way
a natural constant is.  Because if they were objective it would be
pointless to institute them as such.  For instance, it makes no sense to
declare that the Sun must rise from the East, that the Earth must have a
specific orbit around its star, that the speed of light must be a given
number, and so on.  We do not control those magnitudes.

---

Now, relativism is a loaded term with negative connotations.  The
"relativist" is a bugaboo that triggers a fearful reaction in people.
They think that if we dare recognise something as relative, as a product
of institution, we necessarily labour towards its abolition.  This is
simply wrong.  When we philosophise, we learn to listen to what the
other person is saying, and we jointly assess what the state of affairs is.

Notice how dispassionately I am describing institutions as relative.  I
do not mean to suggest that "relative equals bad" or that we should go
to some extreme end of tearing apart all institutions and then living in
a world without order whatsoever.  That would most likely be an
untenable situation.  All I am saying is that there is a distinction to
be made between (i) magnitudes that exist regardless of human convention
and (ii) those which exist because of human convention.  It is simple.

Money, property, family, gender roles, the parliament, the monarch, the
police&#x2026; they are all institutions.  They have a certain character,
else specific attributes, that are developed through the history and
traditions of the given polis.  We can interpret institutions as codes
which encapsulate what people believed to be true or practical for a
particular issue, during the applicable period of time.  Put differently,
an institution reads as "these beliefs frame our conduct right now".

As societies change and are exposed to new information and realities, so
do their values, even if only incrementally.  A few decades ago, women
were not allowed to vote in free elections, for example.  Now this is
considered normal.  In the future, we may have a different arrangement,
such as teenagers being allowed to vote.  The gist is that institutions
are never truly permanent.  They can be rendered obsolete, amended,
reviewed, abolished&#x2026;  Relative, then.  It is a matter of fact.

## The quasi-permanence of institutions

Institutions are relative, though they are conceived and implemented
with the intent of introducing a certain degree of predictability in the
order of the polis.  There is a paradox here.  That which is relative
must be embedded in the conscience of people as seemingly objective.

Think again about the institution of the parliament.  If someone says
that we should abolish it, they are faced with fierce opposition because
such a course of action would usher in an era of uncertainty and
instability, among others.  It would disturb the delicate balance that
the current instituted reality engenders.

There are good reasons to keep institutions in place, as I already
noted, though observe how institutions serve as points of reference.
They are the criteria with which every pertinent rule or pattern of
behaviour is assessed.  For instance, those who will defend the
parliament are, in effect, arguing in favour of parliamentarianism and
all relevant beliefs.  Furthermore, they are of the view that those
ideas are good for the polis at-large: they have worked before and ought
to be respected for the ongoing well-being of the political whole.

Institutions can only work as quasi-permanent; only when they are
presumed as permanent.  It is impossible to incorporate relativity in
very making and presence of an institution.  Again, please understand my
dispassionate use of the notion of "relative" and its derived concepts.
Institutions can be refashioned, yes, but that does not mean that they
must be in a state of constant review.  When institutions are contested
on a continuous basis, there can be no political order.  It will implode
with potentially bad consequences for those involved.

---

To treat institutions as quasi-permanent is a matter of practicality.
The polis has to have a degree of stability so that people can go on
with their lives.  The polis is our ecos, after all: the space within
which we all operate.

The quasi-permanence of institutions imprints them in the conscience as
authoritative.  While the immediate utility is obvious, there also is
potential for misunderstandings where people became dogmatic in their
support of the status quo.  Think, for example, of the person who hears
about "relativism" and immediately associates it with all that is evil
in this world.  They believe that those mischievous relativists will
undermine all that is noble and worth having.

Take the institution of property rights as a case in point.  Private
property is the cornerstone of the current economic model.  It is a
foundational belief, so changing it is no mean task: whatever tweak will
have far-reaching implications.  Though tweaks can happen and we should
not be afraid to have such a discussion when we are trying to solve
certain problems.  Why should, say, billionaires exist?  Why can't we
shave off a bit of their wealth and use it to improve the living
conditions of the vast majority of the population?  Why must a handful
of individuals hold more wealth than the rest of the planet combined?
This is not a law of nature.  It is a convention that, for whatever
reason, has been instituted in place.

If we take the practical quasi-permanence of institutions as normative
and then convert it into a dogma, we are effectively alienating
ourselves from the products of our creation.  We are falsely treating
conventions as natural constants and we forget how they are
all-too-human in their character and very presence.

---

This alienation from our own works effectively reduces us to hostages of
a dead intellectual.  We treat the beliefs which are codified in an
institution as the word of some deity and we dare not recognise the
reality before our eyes; the reality that those beliefs were conceived
by humans in a specific historical context in pursuit of certain ends
that made sense to those people at that time.

When we recognise that institutions are products of convention, we do
not do it to pick a pointless fight with history.  We cannot change what
has already transpired.  All we want is to have a sincere conversation
about the actuality of things.  If an institution becomes alien to us,
if it is removed from our capacity to institute and re-institute, it
performs the function of enslaving us to the past.

Imagine if all your choices in life were foreshadowed by your
grandparents and you were indoctrinated to think of those decisions as
the word of God.  Perhaps what your grandparents would have to say is
interesting and useful.  Though this cannot be presumed to be the case,
nor can any one opinion be exalted to the status of divine command.

Consider when a politician utters the dreaded phrase "there is no
alternative".  For example, in an economic crisis they say that the
government should increase taxes on the people while reducing social
spending.  The excuse is always that such policies are the only course
of action that is possible.  Those claims are predicated on the tacit
alienation from our own institutions.  The politician thinks that there
is no alternative, because they do not want to consider the possibility
of touching certain institutions.  Why not roll back the generous
benefits towards bankers?  Why not prohibit tax havens?  And so on.  Of
course there are alternatives!  We just have to stop being dogmatic.

## Rules, roles, and expectations

The instituted reality of the polis is made up of rules.  There are
rules with a general scope and others with a particular one.  For
example, the institution of fiat money as legal tender, as the only
official way to pay your taxes, is a general rule.  Whereas shaving
one's facial hair while doing their military service is a particular
rule.

Rules are stated preferences or directives on the intended mode of
conduct.  They are linked to a criterion of conditionality and are
enforced by a certain arrangement of power.  In other words, rules tell
people how they should behave in the given situation.

Rules are not targeted at specific individuals.  Instead, they create
and/or delimit roles.  A role is an abstraction that applies to a class
of individuals who fulfil certain criteria.  For instance, the
unconditional rule to take off one's hat while entering a specific
building abstracts away the subjectivity of the person: it covers anyone
wearing a hat.

You may think that there are rules which are about individuals, such as
what the president of the republic has to do.  Though here, too, the
rules envisage a role.  They pertain to whomever assumes control of the
institution.  They are still abstracting away the subjectivity of the
person.

Roles always have an implicit scope of action.  They define who the
agent is and what they can do.  The role of the president of the
republic comes with all the duties and powers of that office.

---

Remember that institutions are relative.  Rules and roles remain open to
interpretation.  When, say, a new president comes to power and breaks
certain traditions, they are effectively remaking the role by changing
some of its facets.  Whether this is good or not, desirable or not, is
beside the point.  What matters for us now is to understand that roles
come with certain expectations.  These expectations are either
explicitly stated in the conditionality of the rule, or they are
implicit in the minds of relevant people.

When a person conforms with expectations, they are operating in line
with their role.  They are not fully expressing their subjectivity.  A
soldier who is wearing their uniform is doing what soldiers must do.
It's not that those clothes necessarily are their favourite ones.

Now what does that imply for one's personhood?  If rules are everywhere
around us and we are always conforming with them, who are we, really?
When we see someone behave in certain ways, are we observing their
actual preferences or their conformance with expectations?

To re-use an example from my last presentation on "The presumptive idol
of you": <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-30-presumptive-idol/>.
Picture this acquaintance of mine who was acting in accordance with the
stereotype of the "alpha male" while in the presence of women.  He was
pretending to be tough, dominant, unflinching, emotionless.  Was he
though?  In reality, there is no such person.  It's a dangerous lie.

Expectations condition the behaviour of situational agents of action.
When we always do what the role says, we effectively are denied of our
subjectivity or are making it a copy of what others want.

---

The person who only conforms with roles is basically playing a game.
They become the avatar of the applicable expectations and they do only
what the rules of the game permit.  Their goals are foreshadowed by the
game's world.  There may be benefits, sure, though they come at the cost
of one's honesty.

Such a role-playing fellow is denying their reality.  They may ignore or
suppress their emotions for the sake of winning in this little game.
They might become obsessed with proving to others how good they are at
this role.  They do it because they are misguided.  It is how they are
conditioned to think.  Or they do it with the ulterior motive of gaining
the rewards this game has for its participants.

Whatever the case, expectations, roles, and rules have a profound effect
on one's selfhood.  They influence or outright determine who the person
is and what they are doing.

This is where we observe the connection between ecos and polis.  Recall
that I explained how they both have a meaning of the wider space within
which one's presence is made manifest.  They are not limited to the
place.  Not even one's own house.  Think about the gender roles in a
traditional family.  Those come from the culture, from the rules of the
polis.  Yet the persons who conform with them are made in the image of
the role and are behaving in such ways even within the confines of their
house.  They embody the roles.

When we think about private affairs, then, we should keep in mind that
the people involved do not have a decontextualised presence.  They are
always immersed in a given milieu, they are framed by it, and they learn
how to not express what they truly want.  At least not always.

## Politics will find you

What I just described blurs the distinction between private and public
spheres.  Let me offer you a personal example and you can generalise it
from there.  I had a deeply religious and prejudicial distant relative.
I met her when I was a young adult.  She would make comments about my
appearance; comments which had value judgements built into them.  You
see, I have been able to grow a full beard since I was a teenager.  So I
would get constant remarks such as:

> Why didn't you shave?  Do you want the girls to think you are a thug?

Imagine you find yourself in a room full with such people or in a town
where everyone is like that.  They will not consider the specifics of
your case.  There is no respect whatsoever for what you think is a
private matter.  Your very appearance is political; your body is
political.  They have an opinion about it and they feel entitled to be
vociferous in their conduct.  They will demand that you become who they
expect you to be.  In this case, it is the stereotype of the "good lad"
which is enforced through peer pressure and outright bullying.

You may think that I am exaggerating.  I could keep a clean shave each
day.  It would appease the girls for not having a thug in their midst.
Sure.  Though I would also be confirming their baseless view that some
inconsequential facial hair defines the person.  So I preferred to tell
that relative and those girls to sod off.  Simple though often costly.

We cannot escape from politics.  You may not want to be involved.  Fine!
But they do and they will.  And you shall suffer the consequences.

---

I am giving you an example with facial hair on purpose.  I could have
used something more egregious.  I do it this way to illustrate how even
something as trivial as a bit of hair is made into this major issue that
we are supposed to be highly concerned about.  In reality though, you
know all-too-well that people judge others not just for facial hair.

When I was a child, the boys in my neighbourhood were allowed to go
outdoors and play.  Football, basketball&#x2026; whatever.  The girls were
subject to an altogether different treatment.  They were forced to
remain indoors at all times.  Why is this?  Were they not children?  Did
they not want to play as well?  Why was such a double standard in place?
Did anyone really benefit from it?

The gist is that you are always judged.  You are always expected to
conform with the relevant roles.  Your self, insofar as what you want
and what your subjectivity is, is irrelevant.  Unless you make a stand
and assume agency, you simply are an avatar in this role-playing game.
You are reduced to a hypocrite who suppresses their real wants in order
to win some inane reward in this little game.  You are dead inside.

What I want you to understand from this is that politics is pervasive.
There is no ecos that exists in a vacuum.  There is no way for you to
live as a social animal yet remain outside the instituted reality.  It
will be there no matter what.  The only choice you have is whether you
try to do something about it if you care.  To reinterpret the roles.  To
reform the rules.  To enact institutions that respect and safeguard the
diversity of the human condition.

Remain apolitical if you want.  But don't delude yourself into thinking
that politics will not come after you sooner or later.  It will, for sure.

## The false dichotomy of individual VS collective

To be clear, I am not suggesting that we should abolish all rules and
just do whatever we want.  That would not be sustainable.  There is a
good reason to have some sort of structure in place.  Otherwise we
operate in an environment of radical uncertainty; an environment that is
no longer conducive to all sorts of benign activities.

We will not outgrow politics while remaining human in the way we
currently are.  The key is to find a balance between competing
priorities: the good of the place and the good of the space.  This can
be framed as the individual versus society.  You may think it is an easy
choice.  Perhaps you are an individualist who believes that "only the
individual exists" and that there are no so-called "collectivist"
entities of any kind.  You would be labouring under a falsehood, taking
for granted the dichotomy between the individual and the collective.

There is no individual in abstract.  There is no individual in some
decontextualised nothingness.  Every person is brought into a world that
predates them: their parents, their neighbours, their language, their
customs, and so on.  Every person grows up experiencing stimuli through
filters that are not of their own choosing.

The construct of the individual is analytical, as is that of the
collective.  "Analytical" means that we discern a pattern in the cosmos
and treat it as if it had a standalone presence.  We do not mean that it
actually exists on its own in a vacuum.  These are aspects of a singular
reality.  The microscopic level is that of a single person, treated with
a degree of abstraction.  Whereas the macroscopic view is that of the
interplay between those persons and the emergent phenomena to be
discerned therein, also with a degree of abstraction.

---

The choice between the individual and society is not an easy one because
the line dividing the two is not clear.  It is a singular reality, as I
said.

Forget about whether society exists as some collectivist magnitude and
just think about climate change.  Our ecos, our habitat, is being
eroded.  An individual who lives right now may not care about it and,
indeed, most people do not really think about the environment.  They do
not care as they assume it is not their problem.  Whatever consequences
will be felt by future generations, right?

Think about the concept of "future generations" for a moment.  Is this a
thing that exists?  No.  Is it sheer fantasy?  No.  It is a potential of
our condition.  There will be humans who will be born into a hostile
environment, especially if those of us now do not think about them in
the future.  The concept of "future generations" thus hints at a
potential subject and this subject is collective.  It is a class of
people who are defined by their age relative to us.  It is a group that
will most definitely experience the calamitous effects of our choices.

To dismiss the concept of "future generations" as some preoccupation of
a fringe group of misguided collectivists is a pernicious folly.  You
cannot afford to ignore this magnitude, for you too have been determined
by previous generations.  Your language, your culture, the institutions
in your midst: they are not of your own making and they do predate you.

So please avoid this sloppy thinking of treating analytical constructs
as if they are actual.  It is fruitful to perform an analysis, yes,
though we must do so with the requisite self-awareness.  Otherwise we
are prone to errors in the very method we are employing.

## Balancing the good of the place and the space

There is a proverb, which might be of Greek origin, though I am not sure
and it does not matter, anyway.  It states that:

> A society grows when elders plant trees whose shade they know they will
> never sit in.

This is another take on the false dichotomy between the individual and
the collective.  It is a profound insight into the singular reality that
contains both the individual and the collective.  Whatever distinction
between the two is analytical.  And whatever we have as institutions,
rules, roles, expectations, and the impression of selfhood is, in one
way or another, defined intersubjectively.  It does not exist in a
vacuum of nothingness.  It does not have a standalone presence and
cannot be properly understood in its own right without reference to its
supersystem.

We thus return the problématique of managing politics, the affairs of
the polis.  We need to tend to the integrity and overall quality of our
instituted reality.  We have to preserve a modicum of structure and
order so that we may enjoy the stability that allows us to pursue all
those endeavours we sometimes take for granted in our life.

To this end, we have to recognise that the institutions are not alien to
us.  They are made by us for our needs.  An institution is a human
invention, a product of our ingenuity and practical reasonableness.

---

Treating institutions as taboo or as gods or, anyhow, as magnitudes that
we cannot affect only works against us.  The same with all stereotypes
or beliefs that we dare not question while we partake in all those
role-playing games.  Value judgements that go unchallenged tend to keep
us hostage to a view of the world that is dogmatic.

What is human in origin, all the chremata&#x2014;to re-use a term I mentioned
before&#x2014;, can be fathomed in a new light.  We can re-institute the
institutions.  We can remake the rules and redraw the boundaries.  Not
for the sake of making changes.  Not because of some frivolous desire to
prove a point.  No.  We must not forget that our polis is indeed ours.
This way we know what to do when we have to tweak certain aspects of the
instituted reality in order to contribute to our ongoing shared wellness.

I am not telling you all this to nudge you towards joining a political
party or becoming a revolutionary.  I am merely showing you the bigger
picture of our reality.  We are political no matter what.  This is not
to say that day-to-day politics is interesting or nice or whatever.  It
most likely is not.  There is filth, corruption, conspiracy, treason,
and war.  It is an ugly place.  But such is the human condition.  We do
not live in an angelic world because we are not angels.

Not all is bad though.  Think about that proverb I mentioned a few
minutes ago about the elders who plant trees whose shade they shall
never sit in.  Imagine how your grandparents and their grandparents took
care of you and tried to make the world a better place for you to have a
decent chance in life.  There is cooperation and solidarity among our
species.  Again, we want to avoid simplistic binaries and false
dichotomies.

---

And some final words on this notion of keeping politics out of our life.
I have talked with lots of competent people who are experts in some
field of specialisation: scientists, engineers, programmers&#x2026;  Some
live in a bubble and don't realise that politics is pertinent to them.

Take the scientist, for example.  To do science one needs laboratories,
equipment, a group of specialists, and lots of experimentation.  All
this requires money; money that the scientist will most likely not have.
Science depends on funding.  Where do funds come from, exactly?  In most
cases, they are directly or indirectly provided by the government or
some private actors which are predominantly businesses.  Funding always
comes with strings attached even if those are implicit in the form of
incentives.  The scientist must compete with other scientists for those
scarce resources.  They must peddle their research programme in order to
get the money and do the work.  Yes, there is the ideal of finding the
truth, though it is driven by practical considerations with their
implicit political or economic calculus.

Same principle for what happens at the workplace.  The prevailing
conditions are not the product of some law of nature.  Those too are
instituted as such.  They are political throughout.  What you think
about politics is irrelevant.  The rules still apply to you and you
continue to be subject to the roles and expectations that go with them.

I understand the salient point to "keep politics out of this".  Indeed,
there are technical matters that have to be treated with the requisite
precision.  My plea to you is to not forget about the bigger picture.
There is a whole world outside whatever technical domain; an instituted
reality; a polis that does not draw an indelible line between private
and public spheres.  You cannot opt out on a whimsy.  If you do not
speak, others will.  And you will not like it.

That's all for today, folks.  Thank you very much for your attention!

