---
title: "Ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "A-IhZaXzzcQ"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]

## Table of Contents

1.  Definitions
2.  The four facets of a human being
3.  The mystical facet in practice
4.  Religiosity and mysticism
5.  Moderation through knowledge
6.  Hubris, mythology, and ordinary experiences
7.  Myth as technology
8.  Who should encode and decode myths

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  This
video is a continuation of my last presentation about the living
universe and specifically the meaning of the words "cosmos" and "logos":
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-05-cosmos-logos-living-universe/>.

Today's video will introduce concepts such as "mysticism" or the
"mystical" facet of the human experience.  I understand these are
heavily loaded terms and it can be tricky to overcome some preconceived
notions.  Still, I ask that you keep an open mind as we approach this
subject with a clear philosophical intent.

Suffice to say, here at the outset, that mysticism and related concepts
are not the same as occult rituals and beliefs in the supernatural,
superstitions or such mumbo jumbo, and the like.

As with the previous presentation, I will start with some definitions.
It is important to explain how I will be using certain terms, so that we
are all on the same page.  Then I will gradually substantiate the claim
that humans have a mystical side that they can develop, effectively
broadening their perspective about the oneness of the living universe.

## Definitions

-   **Mystery (Μυστήριο):** It is a noun derived from a word that
    practically means initiation to a given field of knowledge or
    tradition.  Other meanings of "mystery" include that which is secret
    or obscure.  Secrecy and obscurity are interesting occurrences in this
    context.  If you think about it, they are the inverse of knowledge
    because when you do not understand something, when you lack the
    requisite analytical framework, the subject appears alien to you even
    though it is not inherently unintelligible.  For example, when an
    average computer user is presented with the source code of a program
    they feel it is all a mystery to them because they lack the requisite
    training.  Thus the mysteries presuppose knowledge and the lack of
    such knowledge gives the impression of obscurity.

-   **Mystic (Μύστης):** The person who has been initiated in a given field
    of knowledge or tradition, who holds the knowledge and continues the
    tradition.  Do not conflate this with "mystique" which describes a
    situation characterised by mystery (as explained above).

-   **Myth (Mythos/Μύθος):** That which is communicated or taught.  The
    narrative.  It also describes a tale or invented story whose primary
    function is to teach some deeper meaning and secondarily to entertain
    the audience.

-   **Ataraxia (Αταραξία):** A state of non-disturbance or else
    tranquillity.  This relates to one's overall disposition where they
    have established inner harmony and are no longer compelled to act on
    the basis of instincts or emotions.  In a sense, ataraxia is freedom
    of the highest order: freedom from control.

-   **Hubris (Ύβρις):** The brand of cockiness that does not recognise the
    boundaries within which human experience must unfold.

-   **Psychagogia (Ψυχαγωγία):** This literally means "entertainment" though
    we must break it down to its constituents to appreciate its
    significance.  We have "psyche" (the soul or vital force or inner
    world which is studied, e.g., by psychology) and "agoge" which is
    education, upbringing, or guidance (e.g. pedagogy (παιδαγωγία)&#x2014;the
    education of [young] people).  In this sense, entertainment is not
    simply about passing our time and casually having fun.  Rather, it
    entails the normative view that culture ought to teach or inspire us
    to be the best version of ourselves.  Psychagogia must prepare people
    to aspire to their highest.  Education is then used to communicate
    profound lessons, to initiate people in some tradition or school of
    thought.  This is best done in a way that is fun and enjoyable,
    because keeping it interesting helps with the communicative aspect.
    So we can see the connection with the ordinary sense of
    "entertainment".

## The four facets of a human being

Let us analyse the general features of a human being.  By "analyse" I
mean to construct a mental representation of patterns in the world and
treat them as if they had a standalone presence.  These analytical
constructs are parts of the same system: we cannot have one without the
others and expect the same results.

The human experience can initially be divided in three facets: (i) body,
(ii) emotions, (iii) mind.  All humans have those.  Of the three, the
body is the most developed.  It consists of all the instincts and the
mechanisms that regulate one's presence.  For example, a human knows how
to breath without further instruction.  Then come the emotions.  These
are like the body, in the sense that they are well developed, though
they can be trained to be in concert with rational action.  And then we
have the mind, which describes the faculties we possess for computation,
pattern-matching, reasoning, and the like.

All three influence each other.  A healthy body maintains a balance that
produces pleasant emotions or at least does not generate feelings that
are self-destructive.  This, in turn, helps the mind stay focused on
thinking things through.  Conversely, an unhealthy body engenders
emotions that can hurt us and, by extension, the mind is no longer
capable of focusing on its tasks.

The relationship between those three is circular.  If the mind is
obsessed with something that is unattainable, it will eventually
contribute to feelings of failure, worthlessness, disappointment, and
those will contribute to processes in the body that adapt various
subsystems of the organism to the new equilibrium of overall negativity.
We can see this at play with diseases such as depression which is
typically considered a mental condition though it necessarily has to
influence all three facets as they do not have a standalone presence.

This circularity is noticeable even through minor injuries, as the
person tends to obsess over the wound and can be a bit paranoid about
it: the mind no longer performs optimally, the emotions involve
frustration and a general pessimistic outlook, and the body obviously
suffers from the injury.  Same principle for one's diet, everyday
routines, and levels of activity: the circularity is there.

Notice how the heading of this section references four facets yet I have
only described three of them.  Which is the fourth one?  It is the
mystical side which can be described as potentially superordinate to the
previous three though, again, they are all part of the same system.  The
mystical involves training, the accumulation of knowledge, and the
ability to use the insights derived therefrom to establish harmony
between the facets of the human experience.

The mystical is associated with notions of enlightenment because (i) it
initially is the least developed of a human's facets, and (ii) can be
applied to direct the other three facets.

Remember what we said about terms such as "mystery": they pertain to the
introduction to a given field of knowledge or tradition.  Without this
initiation, the mystical facet is obscure and would appear as
unapproachable or mysterious in the sense of weird and alien.

We can get glimpses of the mystical facet of a human being in action by
observing differences in behaviour between kids and adults.  Both groups
share the same dispositions and faculties, though the latter is more
likely to have accumulated knowledge which is applied in the given
situation to make the correct judgement call.  This is the hint we need,
as it tells us that more and better training, the appropriate
initiation, can bring us closer to this ideal of having the right
perspective and making the correct decisions.

## The mystical facet in practice

Consider what I covered in my previous video about Cosmos, Logos, and
the living universe.  I basically claimed that the universe has the same
features of ratio, rate, reason, language, and order that we have.  The
mystical realisation then, is that humans are not the epicentre of the
world.  Neither individually, nor collectively.  Rather, they are parts
of the greater whole, just as everything else from particles to galaxies
and anything in between or beyond.

Why is this a mystical realisation, you may wonder?  Because it involves
deep knowledge of the world&#x2014;remember the meaning of "mystery" as
initiation.  This knowledge is not something we get without considerable
effort.  We have the potential for it, but we have to develop it.
Compare that to the instinct of self-preservation: it is there from day
one and already is well developed.

Without the mystical facet, our body governs our world-view, as it
conditions us to a state of egocentrism.  We start from the survival
instinct and so we treat everything in terms of how it relates to us:
everything is a means to the end of surviving.  As we learn about our
self, which involves learning about the others, given that no human has
a standalone presence, we begin to sense how egocentrism is misleading:
we are not alone.

As we develop the mystical facet, we essentially discover the others,
which provides us with a new perspective on selfhood.  Instead of
thinking of our self as the epicentre, we understand that it is yet
another node in a distributed system of coexisting forms of being.  The
sense of a centre with everything revolving around it is an illusion.
Yes, that illusion helps us live but it cannot be left in charge of
things.  It has to be controlled by a more refined instrument, so to
speak.  So we move from the subjective to the intersubjective: we think
in terms of relations and our role in the greater whole.

Developing the mystical facet has the effect of reducing the overall
influence of the other facets on the human's conduct.  The mystic, which
is the person who is involved in mysticism, who has been initiated to
the mysteries&#x2014;the profound knowledge, as we said&#x2014;is no longer
compelled to act on instinct or emotion.  The mystic has perspective of
the bigger picture, which necessarily brings about harmony.

To put it in practical terms, the mystic does not need validation from
others, such as in the form of fame or glory, because they understand
these are trivial concerns in the grand scheme of things.  The mystic
cannot be disturbed by the lack of such validation: they are indifferent
towards it because they know it is inconsequential.

Consider how egoist many behavioural patterns of humans are.  Such as
the all too common altercations that start with something like this:

-   Move!
-   No, you move!
-   What did you say?
-   Move!
-   Do you know who I am?

You get the idea.  The same mechanics are at work when humans try to
out-compete each other over issues such as who has the most expensive
car, who gets the most followers on social media, whose career is the
most successful, and so on.

The mystic knows that these preoccupations keep us trapped in a cycle
where the body, emotions, and mind influence each other without
direction or structure.  There is no overarching sense of stability, of
couching those three facets in terms of a superordinate one which holds
them in check and keeps them functioning in concert.

In this regard, the mystic is not attached to their self and to
everything that appears as an extension of selfhood.  They are not
egocentric.  For example, they are not concerned whether their project
is perceived as successful or not.  The mystic's commitment to the quest
for knowledge appears outwardly as aloofness from the fray, as if they
are there without being there.

This sort of indifference comes from a position of knowledge.  It is not
the same as a casual claim that "I don't care".  Rather, it involves
profound realisation of the factors at play.  It is about being able to
look at the bigger picture and understand how things relate to each
other, which necessarily includes the view of the person's role in the
universe.

It is the ataraxia I mentioned earlier.  The state of non-disturbance
that one can reach&#x2014;or at least work towards&#x2014;through training.  To
outsiders, the person who is at that stage or approximating it will seem
utterly strange, obscure, alien.  It is the dual meaning of "mystery",
as we have already discussed.

## Religiosity and mysticism

At this point it is important to stress that mysticism is not about
transcending the human experience as a human.  That involves the
impossibility of trying to overcome the body while being embodied, to
escape from emotions and sense impressions while having faculties of
emotion and sense impression, to accumulate and use knowledge with the
means at one's disposal while wanting to go beyond them.

Mysticism then is not about becoming a non-human human, but rather
aspiring to our highest.  To be the most refined version of what
humanity has to offer.  This is where religion and religiosity come into
the picture.  We can think of the religious experience in two broad
terms, based on historical evidence:

-   **Religion without mystical underpinnings:** This is the same sort of
    egoism I mentioned earlier, where humans find reasons to fight each
    other.  Religion is thus weaponised in the service of ulterior goals.
    Hence wars over religion, proselytism through fire and steel, witch
    hunts, inquisitions, intolerance of other beliefs, and the like.

-   **Religion as a conduit to mystery:** This is the understanding of
    religiosity as a way to enrich the human experience.  It can help
    people have a sense of the bigger picture and learn how they are part
    of a greater whole.  In this regard, religion is not about dividing
    people into groups or clans, as it were, but showing them that despite
    superficial differences, there is something which is common in the
    multitude; something we can all understand.

When we are on the path of knowledge, we no longer see religion as an
obstacle to enlightenment.  Instead, we treat it as yet another
innovation of humanity, whose purpose is to store and disseminate
knowledge in a form that is understandable even by those who do not have
time for intensive training.

To the mystic, religion is not about who is right and who is wrong, but
rather presents a corpus of work that can facilitate the development of
the mystical facet of a human being.  This is not about following
religious practices to the letter, such as the ceremonies or the
prayers.  There is a deeper understanding of what those signify, what
their real purpose is, which is not about adherence to themselves.  They
are not the goal.

Religion is a problem only when it is devoid of knowledge.  When it
becomes a dogma that one must follow to the letter without appreciation
of its underlying values or hidden meanings.  Though this is true not
just for religion, but everything humans may associated themselves with.
Think, for example, of football fans and hooliganism.

Again, one must have a sense of perspective.

## Moderation through knowledge

Since we cannot become non-human humans, mysticism is all about
elevating the human experience to its highest potential.  We cannot do
that by trying to become purely rational, or fully emotional, or only
bodily.  Remember that those are part of the same system.  One cannot
exist without the others.  Instead of prioritising one over the others,
we must work towards achieving harmony between them, where none
overpowers the other two.  This is what the mystical facet does.  The
fourth component that binds the other three in harmony.  To this end, we
have some profound insights that come to us from the ancient Greek
religion.  Specifically the temple of Apollo in Delphi (an area in
Greece) from where we get those three maxims:

1.  Know yourself (Γνώθι σεαυτόν)
2.  Nothing in excess (Μηδέν άγαν)
3.  Ensure, ruin nears (Εγγύα, πάρα δ'Άτα) [EDIT: I talk a bit about the
    translation in the video. ]

Apollo was the god of harmony.  This symbolism is no coincidence.  It
captures an archetype, a view of the world that we keep encountering
regardless of the particularities of the case.

The three maxims must be read together in light of how we understand the
Cosmos.  To know yourself you have to learn about the whole, because you
do not have a standalone presence.  There is no such thing as, say, a
decontextualised conscience that can understand itself in a vacuum.
There is the fully fledged human kind, a system of systems in its own
right, which coexists with everything in its immediate environment and
the supersystems that envelop it.  One can only begin to gain knowledge
of their self by finding the others (other forms of life, not humans in
particular).  This is a lifelong commitment to selfhood as
non-self-centred-ness.  One cannot be certain of their findings though,
as that is reckless: it is an implicit claim of knowing about the whole
through partial information.  Unflinching certainty undoes what one is
trying to achieve.

As for doing nothing in excess, this is what we already found by
examining the facets of a human, where we realised that we cannot
amplify one over the others.  There has to be a balance, a virtuous
midpoint.  As each person is different, the balance is not the same for
everyone.  There is no one-size-fits-all, if you will.  Instead, each
person has to learn about who they are, in the sense I already
explained, in order to be in a position of finding their own midpoint.

Furthermore, we can discern how moderation, in its uncertainty about the
absolutes, relates to ataraxia.  If you cling on to something such as
social validation, then you are exaggerating its significance in the
grand scheme of things: you are doing things in excess as you are
attaching value to them when they do not deserve it.

## Hubris, mythology, and ordinary experiences

The word "hubris" describes the deviation from what ought to be a
moderate disposition.  In a sense, to commit hubris is to lack harmony,
to not understand the archetype symbolised by Apollo.  In Greek
mythology there are lots of stories about humans who overestimated their
abilities and who had to suffer the consequences of their lack of
judgement, of their insolence.

One such example which I will also reference again further below, is
Odysseas or Ulysses, the protagonist of Homer's *Odyssey*, who was
travelling back home after the Trojan war and was captured by a monster
known as a cyclops.  Odysseas managed to escape from the cyclops but
instead of heading home he chose to brag about it and permanently injure
the cyclops.  This brought about the wrath of the cyclops' father,
Poseidon who is the god of the seas, which forced Odysseas to travel for
ten years instead of what should have been a short trip.

The details do not matter right now.  The point is that the protagonist
of the story did not recognise the boundaries of his existence and thus
had to suffer from his lack of foresight or perspective.

We should not think of hubris as punishment from the gods.  This is just
a metaphor, a story that is easy to convey.  We must instead focus on
the meaning of a balanced attitude and of avoiding excesses.  Think
about everyday experiences.  Too little food deprives you of the energy
you need to be effective in whatever you are doing.  Too much food makes
you sick.  Both of those extremes are a form of hubris: you need to eat
the right amount of food and the right kind of food.

Same principle for everything we do.  Let's say you are out hiking.  You
must know what your abilities are but also what specific requirements
the terrain has as well as what the weather demands.  Otherwise you
cannot know what the right balance is.  If you are super confident in
your abilities without accounting for the prevailing conditions, if you
are certain even though you do not really know how things stand, that
will lead to your ruin such as in the form of a severe injury.

We see then that hubris is not about some abstract theological
considerations or even an artistic device to forward a narrative.  It is
directly applicable to our quotidian life.  Which can only make us
wonder about the utility of myths as a medium and of mythology as a
source of knowledge.

## Myth as technology

In our age the word "myth" is equivalent to a fabricated story or, more
broadly, a falsehood.  For example, we hear about attempts at "myth
busting" which are supposed to shed light on how things actually are.
In other words, myths and mythology are largely considered undesirable.

As with all great lies, this view is based on a kernel of truth.  Yes,
myths are fabricated stories.  Of course they are.  They do not
necessarily correspond to some historical fact and they do not have to
take place in an actual country or whatnot.  But they are not lies
either.  Because their verity is not about what they say in literal
terms, but what they mean beyond the superficialities of appearance, of
the narrative.

You must understand that myths are a form of ancient technology.  An
invention that has helped humanity flourish.  Myths have mnemonic value.
They are easy to remember.  This makes them suitable for even the most
low-tech civilisation to store knowledge in a highly resilient and
interoperable format and also to disseminate it effectively.  A myth can
contain a rich corpus of work whose meanings are condensed in schematic
representations.  Put differently, a myth is like a compressed file that
we need to unpack with the right tools in order to decipher the
knowledge contained within.

Consider, again the scene of the *Odyssey* I mentioned in the previous
section.  Our protagonist, Odysseas or Ulysses, is captured by a
cyclops: a giant who towers over ordinary humans.  The cyclops possesses
a single eye on its forehead.  This kind of description serves as a
mnemonic device, a symbol we can always recall&#x2014;even as young kids or
especially as young kids because of the impression it leaves on us.  The
cyclops holds Odysseas and his companions captive inside its cave.  It
is preparing to make a lunch out of them.  The protagonist cannot
possibly challenge the beast to a one-on-one combat: that would result
in certain death.  Instead, Odysseas must use his mind to outsmart this
formidable foe.  The details of the story do not matter right now.

What we learn then just from this is that when faced with seemingly
impossible odds, we should not panic or give up but instead think
carefully about a strategy that will lead us out of the allegorical
cave.  How many times do we need this attitude in life?  In times of
desperation and crisis.  Is it not true that calmness and clarity of
mind can help us circumvent obstacles that would otherwise be impossible
to overcome?  So instead of being superficial and making fun of people
for believing that a cyclops is real&#x2014;which is silly&#x2014;we must keep an
open mind and understand what the myth is trying to teach us.  The best
myths do not concern themselves with mundane details.  Instead they
codify knowledge of patterns that we encounter over and over again
regardless of age and culture.

Continuing with this theme of myth as technology we must draw a
distinction between "ancient" and "outdated".  Myths are a primeval
invention but they remain as relevant as ever, including through art and
religiosity.  Even in this age of advanced technology we employ
mythological practices as part of our culture.  Maybe we don't describe
them in those terms, but the essence is there.  Think, for example, how
important fiction is in our life.  It is part of how we socialise,
communicate ideas, and support our lifelong education.

Take Tolkien's *The Lord Of The Rings* as a case in point.
Superficially, we have an adventure with medieval weaponry and magic
that involves humans, orcs, dragons, and other creatures.  It is fun to
read the books or watch the movies.  Though the narrative is not simply
about what happens with the ring of power in some fantasy land, as it
holds teachings which are directly applicable to our world.  Is it not
true that a person who wields too much power can be dangerous?  And is
that not why we want, at least in principle, to have forms of governance
that distribute competences across more than one person or a few people?

Every myth has a lot to teach, so I am in no way exhausting the topic
with this example.  The point is that Tolkien uses the metaphor of a
magic ring to describe, among others, the complexity of factors that
inform hierarchical forms of organisation.  Just how Plato used the myth
of another magic ring (the Ring of Gyges) to elaborate on matters of
morality and justice.

## Who should encode and decode myths

I noted that myths are like compressed files that we need to unpack
using the right tools.  If we do not do this right, we will reach false
conclusions, just like how we get a garbled output on the computer when
we do not decode a file properly.  Myths have a discursive aspect to
them, they are narratives, meaning that the function of the decoder has
to be performed by a person who has knowledge of the subject matter.

Same principle for the creation of myths.  Anyone can come up with an
imaginary story, but only those who already have insight can encode
profound meanings in metaphors or allegories.  Thus myths are not
inherently didactic *qua myths*.  They can be didactic if they embed
knowledge, if they contribute to psychagogia as mentioned earlier.  And
they are at their best when the meaning they communicate helps us aspire
to our highest.  Which means that the right person to encode and decode
myths is one who is on the path of mystery (in the sense we have already
described): the mystic.

There are myths which do not necessarily help us escape from mediocrity.
For example, I remember having to watch a Batman movie whose title I
have since forgotten.  In the opening part of the story, it is mentioned
that the parents of the Batman are the ones who built the city's public
transport network.  They were rich and just wanted to improve the life
of their fellow citizens, which on the face of it is a noble act.  Yet
one is left to wonder why are there such egregious inequalities in that
city.  Why can't the citizens build their own public transport?  Do they
lack the resources?  Perhaps those resources are in the hands of a tiny
minority of plutocrats including the Batman's parents?  There are so
many questions, which leave us thinking whether accepting the status quo
of that city is indeed a lesson worth having.  Does the myth inspire us
to overcome egocentrism?  Or is it a form of indoctrination that holds
us captive to a state of affairs that is reducible to egoism,
recklessness, hubris?

I am not criticising the Batman story at-large, as the expanded lore may
address those concerns.  The point is that we should not take myths at
face value and should refrain from considering them useful in advance.
Myths are yet another tool we have.  A form of technology.  They are not
the only one.  Each case calls for its own approach.  We need the right
tool for the job.  In practical terms, we must not blithely abandon the
language we use to do science, for example, or deal with legal affairs,
and instead delve into incessant mythologising.  We don't want that.  We
don't want to imply any of that.

The key is to keep an open mind.  Continue searching for knowledge, do
not fall into the trap of absolute certainty, and try to learn who we
are in relation to all there is.  Find the balance.  Seek and ultimately
befriend wisdom, for that is what "philosophy" means.
