---
title: "Who can be a philosopher"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about what is philosophy and who can be a philosopher."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "wby9j8bOEEc"
---

[ Below is the text of the presentation.  Note that in the video I
  sometimes explain statements which are not found in the text. ]


## Table of Contents

1.  About the terms "philosopher" and "wisdom"
2.  Everyone can be a philosopher
3.  The key to philosophy is patience
4.  Patience in interpersonal relations
5.  Patience and the right attitude
6.  Philosophy is for everyone

Hello everyone!  My name is Protesilaos, also known as "Prot".  In this
presentation I want to talk to you in plain terms about the broad theme
of what philosophy is, who can be a philosopher, and why that is useful
in practice.

What I am about to explain at length might surprise some of you.  I am
of the opinion that anyone can be a philosopher.  I shall elaborate on
this statement, so please don't think I am exaggerating or am playing
games with you.  I mean what I say and I don't like gimmicks, anyway.

This presentation is a continuation of my last entry in this series.  I
explained the significance of remaining focused in the here-and-now:

-   **On learning and being present:** <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-06-25-knowledge-presence/>

As always, the text of this presentation is available on my website.  If
you are watching this on the video hosting platform, there is a link in
the description:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-07-who-can-be-philosopher/>


## About the terms "philosopher" and "wisdom"

Before discussing who can be a philosopher, we need to understand what
the term denotes.  The word is of Greek origin.  It is composed of
"philos" (φίλος), which means "friend", and "sophia" (σοφία) which is
"wisdom".  A philosopher is, quite literally, a friend of wisdom.
Philosophy, then, is friendship with wisdom.

In this sense, anyone can be positively inclined towards wisdom just how
anyone can show openness and eagerness towards art or sport.  In case
you are curious, there are words for those as well, but they are not
common in English: philotechnos (φιλότεχνος) and philathlos (φίλαθλος),
respectively.

So what is wisdom, anyway?  Wisdom is the quality of clear judgement.
We understand the bigger picture of a situation and know how the
specifics must fit in.  Wisdom is what enables us to chart the right
course of action, given the available evidence.

Wisdom applies to all sorts of fields of endeavour or activities.  For
example, an artist with an impeccable technique and a special style has
profound insight into their art.  A scientist who does not get fooled by
statistical artefacts or shortcomings in a given method exercises wisdom
by remaining true to the spirit of the scientific enterprise.

The philosopher, then, is not a professional with a given expertise.
There can be specialists of this sort, such as an academic who teaches a
class in philosophy.  But those cases do not exhaust the possibilities
of what "friend of wisdom" entails, as the examples of the artist and
the scientist already hint at.

---

Philosophy is an attitude.  It is the disposition of staying true in our
friendship with wisdom.  We always want to understand it better and
apply our findings to every aspect of our life.  We are committed to
this friendship and are genuine about it.

Everything benefits from wisdom.  The way we conduct ourselves, how we
treat other people, the manner in which we coexist with animals and
other species, our quality as a friend or romantic partner, and so on.
When something is couched in terms of wisdom, it is done in a better way
than when it lacks an understanding of the bigger picture and the
specifics of the case.

We can think of it as the distinction between being mindful and being
reckless.  Would we ever trust a reckless surgeon over a mindful one?
Would we want to be friends with someone who doesn't pay attention to
our needs or would instead prefer a person who actually understands our
condition?

Wisdom thus manifests as thoughtfulness.  We like people who put thought
into what they are doing.  They are better at their art, mindful of
their responsibilities, deliberate in their actions, responsible in
their operations, consistent in their pursuit of correctness.

In other words, thoughtfulness enriches our life.  Wisdom is as
practical as it gets.  It is not some vague abstraction somewhere in the
sky that has nothing to do with our quotidian affairs.  Wisdom can
inform every facet of our existence and underpin all patterns of
behaviour.  It is relevant in every situation.


## Everyone can be a philosopher

Wisdom appears to us as thoughtfulness and thoughtfulness applies to
everything we do.  We can all be more mindful of our condition by
reflecting on it, contemplating its particularities, and trying to
understand how we can perfect our modus operandi as well as our modus
vivendi.

You may be conditioned to think of philosophy as some exclusive club
reserved for academics with a penchant for discussing obscure topics.  I
do not blame you for this misconception, because education generally
does a poor job of presenting philosophy as a practical affair.  It is a
lifestyle.  It does not require of you to be a unidimensional
philosopher and nothing else.  Such is a pernicious caricature which
does a disservice to all of us, as it keeps us away from wisdom.

The reason education does not present philosophy properly is because it
is pedantic about trivia.  We have someone who has put zero thought into
it asking us to write what a specific passage from some ancient text
means.  I remember, for example, how the Greek education system had a
course where students where expected to memorise and recall what some
interpreter had to comment on Plato's *Protagoras*.  Instead of studying
Plato's general points, they were wasting time with secondary
commentary.  I also remember at college when I took an introductory
course to Ethics.  Don't ask me what I learnt, because I had mentally
checked out.  The most boring class ever.  Screw that!

I want you to stop being intimidated by formal education.  Do not let
anyone bilittle you into thinking that you cannot be friends with
wisdom.  You can.  Those who think otherwise lack perspective or have
ulterior motives.

---

"But", I hear you saying, "I am not a genius&#x2026;"  This too is another
harmful stereotype which only excludes people and segregates them.  It
creates an elitist club whose arrogant members pretend to be better than
everybody else.  Screw them too!  Arrogance, exclusive groups, and the
concomitant pretentiousness have nothing to do with wisdom.

To befriend wisdom we only need to be friendly towards it.  In practice,
we are open to the idea of thinking about our condition.  We want to be
more contemplative, more deliberate, more careful&#x2014;and we commit to the
cause.  This has nothing to do with how smart or creative we are.
Perhaps those can help us be more effective, but they are irrelevant to
the disposition of friendliness per se.

I repeat, do not internalise all those narratives and excuses which keep
you away from wisdom.  They disempower you.  They deny you of the
opportunity to have more profound experiences and insights.  They hold
you captive in a state of superficialities where you are just "faking
it" without ever committing yourself to anything in earnest.

I am not saying this because I am some "self-help guru" who is here to
flatter you and show you how great you are.  Not at all!  I live
philosophy everyday and have been doing so for years.  I am telling you
this because it is what I have experienced and genuinely believe.  I
don't care about boosting your ego and will not congratulate you for
nothing.  On the contrary, I would argue that you are not good enough in
whatever it is you are doing if you are not philosophical in your
disposition.

As for the ego, it is something you will learn to overcome.  More on
this a bit later.


## The key to philosophy is patience

It is not peerless smartness or ingenuity that is a prerequisite to
becoming a philosopher.  They are nice to have, but not absolutely
necessary.  There is only one quality we need to start befriending
wisdom: **patience**.  Patience is the foundation of a lifelong commitment
to philosophy.  It is at the root of everything we would consider as
"philosophical".

Let's examine this in practical terms.  We want to be thoughtful.  To do
so, we need to pay attention to what is happening.  To actually focus on
the events, we must take the time to discern and decode them.  To be
able to interpret the data, we require time and effort.  To go through
all this, we have to be patient.

We cannot be thoughtful without patience.  We cannot pay close attention
to things if we are in a hurry.  We cannot discern patterns, let alone
decode them, if we cannot stop to put in the requisite work.  We cannot
interpret any datum if we have no time for it.  In other words, we
simply cannot achieve anything sophisticated with impatience.

Without patience we remain limited to superficialities.  We do stuff at
the surface-level.  We have no depth, no profundity, no solid grasp of
the subject matter.  We are not as good as we could have been.  We do
not give the issue the attention it requires.

To connect to the theme of my last presentation, impatience means that
we lack presence.  We are not giving the here-and-now our undivided
attention.  Our mind wonders away into other worlds and is "pulling us",
so to speak, in that direction.  We thus feel unsettled: we do stuff
clumsily, awkwardly, incompetently.

---

Patience slows things down and puts us in control.  We have to imagine
it like driving a car through the countryside.  If we go at breakneck
speed, we miss out on all the sites.  We don't see the flowers.  We
don't appreciate the trees.  We don't take a moment to breath some fresh
air.  We don't even notice the sun as it sets on the horizon.  We are
just driving like crazy.

By slowing things down, we gain a whole new perspective.  Suddenly this
trip to the countryside has so much more to show us.  It is a rewarding
experience.  Now we spot the flowers.  We can see them blossoming.  We
also observe the playfulness of the bees, the birds, and everything.
There is the majestic forest and the colourful sunset.  They take our
breath away.  The whole scene is brimming with life.  Wow!  None of this
could register before.  It was always "there", but we did not have the
right attitude towards it.  We were impatient.

Patience puts us in control because it removes the bias we have for
doing things quickly.  It is a cliché nowadays that people have no time.
Unless they are physically trapped in some sweatshop for all their
waking hours, unless they are victims of tyranny, they do have time.
They just assume they don't have time because everything is incessantly
calling for their attention.  They simply cannot focus on anything.
They are drowning in overstimulation and have ceded control.

If we want to do a million things, then of course we will not manage to
fit everything into our routine.  We try to do a bit of everything but
as we are running out of time, we do not go in-depth.  We can only give
each item a quick look and move on to the next one.  This is a vicious
cycle.  It makes us think we cannot manage our life as we are always
short on time.  We are driving at breakneck speed without realising it.

---

Patience gives us control because it reminds us that our time is finite.
We must not allow ourselves to be compelled into action by every
stimulus out there.  Advertisements, social media, constant
notifications on all our "smart" devices with a sound that is optimised
to keep us hooked to them, apps that track all the minutia and keep
nagging us to do this or the other, et cetera.  With patience, we become
more eclectic.  We learn to pick and choose what we truly like.  We find
the signal and seek ways to blot out the distractions.  All the noise
means nothing to us.

Suppose we find ourselves in a crowd.  Everybody wants to talk to us.
But there is one person among them we want to spend some quality time
with.  If we are in the mindset of answering every call to action, then
we will accommodate everyone in the crowd and necessarily miss the
opportunity to dedicate ourselves to this special someone.  Whereas if
we are patient, we will tell others to wait just like we do.  First we
offer our undivided attention to this one person and then we move on to
the next task, again giving it the time it requires.

By being selective, we stop being accommodative.  We cannot please
everyone and we cannot be physically present everywhere.  There are
inescapable trade-offs.  By recognising this insight, we are empowered
to act.  We no longer have a false sense of duty to respond to whatever
is out there.  It is impossible to do that.  We have to impose some
structure and set priorities.  In other words, we must assume the
initiative.  We become active as we stop living life from the sidelines.
We stop being merely reflexive.  We assume agency.  We become who we
want to be and we slowly work towards that eventuality.

This all starts with patience and is sustained by patience.


## Patience in interpersonal relations

Patience engenders thoughtfulness.  It is the key to everything.  This
also applies to human relations.  Now, you may still have some leftover
biases and are thinking what does philosophy have to do with actual
people.  "Isn't it all about concepts and abstractions?" I hear you
saying.  No, it is not.  I already explained that we want to be friends
with wisdom and that wisdom applies to everything we do.  Let's think
about it with practical examples.

Someone is talking to us.  If we are impatient, we will interrupt them.
So we will not actually listen to what they are saying.  We will make
assumptions and jump to early conclusions.  But we are not offering them
the chance to elaborate.  Or, we may be compelled by contract or some
institutional arrangement to remain silent, in which case our impatience
pushes our mind to lose focus and think about other things.  Whatever
the specifics, we are not really "there".

Perhaps you think this is a forced example.  I ask you then how good of
a listener are you?  Can you actually let someone talk and then respond
to their points?  Do you have the empathy to recognise that the other
person needs to express themselves?  By the same token, if you are the
kind of person who talks all the time, do you have the capacity to slow
things down and allow others some space to show their individuality?

Being an attentive listener or considerate speaker is the same as being
a keen observer.  Remember the example with the trip to the countryside.
By taking it slow, we pay attention to the little things which together
contribute to a whole new understanding of what is "there".  When we
listen, when we speak and see, we do it with patience and we learn from
it.  Else we let important information slip away.

---

If two people in a conversation are patient, then we have a wonderful
coincidence of attitudes.  They both take the time to listen to what the
other fellow has to say and they both treat each other with respect.
Whatever the topic of the discussion, it is more profound and rewarding
than if they were effectively competing with each other over who gets
the most time "on stage"; who attracts most of the attention.

Patience makes us respect our own time and, by extension, helps us
develop empathy so that we respect others as well.  In turn, patience
puts us in the right frame of mind, as we no longer seek the fake token
of attention: we want to go further and understand things at a greater
depth.  What the topic of our inquiry is does not matter.  It can be
art, sport, science, a craft, or another being that we care about.

When we understand something better, we begin to realise that our self
is not the only one who is important.  For example, when we acknowledge
that other people need time to speak as well, we see in them the same
need for individuality that we find in us.  We are compassionate and,
thus, considerate.  As this insight develops further, we recognise that
our ego is not important.  It is a false god that we worship only in our
ignorance; only when our impatience prevents us from experiencing in
earnest all those wonderful presences "out there".

Patience broadens the scope of our perception.  We let go of the private
cult of personality we have.  We admit to the presence of others.  We
are in control of how we experience phenomena, as we now are more
competent at tracing patterns and making sense of them.  We do not let
distractions interfere with what we are doing.  We effectively have a
different world-view than our impatient self ever did.

---

Again, I must stress that this is all philosophical.  Consider this
example where we went on the trip to the countryside and experienced
nature in full.  We gave it our undivided attention.  We allowed it to
enter our space and enrich our life.  We could do it only because we
were patient.  We were actually focused on the moment and had no
pressure to be somewhere else.  We were not in a hurry.

This same approach applies to how an intimate relationship would unfold.
If we are not focused on the moment, we are faking it or simply not
making the most out it.  And the same for every field of endeavour.  If1
we do not put it the endless hours of hard work, we will never have the
skills for it.  A foreign language, programming, playing the guitar&#x2026;
Whatever it is, it has to be done with the understanding that there is
no magic way to learn it in an instant.  We must be patient.

Patience grants us perseverance.  It gives us a special kind of
endurance as we are not phased by the lack of short-term gains.  Just as
with a foreign language, we do not expect to be fluent in it from day
one and are content with the slow and incremental improvements to our
skillset.

Perseverance is what we need when we venture on an uncertain path.
Imagine the scientist who formulates a hypothesis.  They have to put it
to the test, evaluate the findings, prepare more experiments, and more
hypotheses, and theories on top, until they eventually make a discovery.
It is a long and tedious process.  Humanity largely benefits from it.
None of that is possible without perseverance.


## Patience and the right attitude

Patience which is now expressed as perseverance sustains our inquiry
into whatever it is we are doing.  The scientist who goes through the
rigours of experimentation remains true to the more general idea of
discovering the truth in the given case.  The artist who practices for
hours on end is committed to the aesthetic experience.  The romantic
partner who actually cares cherishes the relationship.  And so on.

When we persevere in this way, we learn to deal with a degree of
uncertainty and/or a sense of curiosity of what is to be revealed.  We
then have a disposition of being curious and an outlook of not taking
things at face value.  Why?  Because we do not rush to conclusions.  We
are not in a hurry to call it a day.

Patience, then, trains us to be inquisitive and dubitative.  We inquire
about the world, about the subject matter, and we always maintain a
healthy dose of doubt about our findings.  Our patience has taught us
that there are things out there we have not noticed yet.  There is
always something that intrigues us even when we are experts in our
field.  Those who think they know everything are simply impatient and are
lying to themselves.

Inquisitiveness and dubitativeness are fancy words, aren't they?  The
equivalent in Greek, which exist in English as well, are *zetetic*
(ζητητικός) and *aporetic* (απορητικός), respectively.  But we do not
need to know such technicalities to actually conduct ourselves in the
spirit of inquisitiveness and dubitativeness.  All we need is patience.
The rest follows from there organically, because patience entails
commitment in the face of uncertainty.

---

You may recall from my previous presentation the notion of *parrhesia*.
I explained it in detail, just as I am doing now but here is a quick
summary to refresh your memory.

Parrhesia is the attitude of speaking plainly.  No tricks, no gimmicks!
When we express ourselves in parrhesia, we do it with honesty.  We have
no intention to fool anyone, no ulterior motive to flatter them, nothing
of the sort.  All we want is to speak our mind and express what we
consider to be authentic in that very moment.

Patience is at the root of parrhesia as well.  This is because we cannot
have a sense of sincerity and of its truth if we are distracted all the
time.  And, if we try to fake it, by masquerading our ignorance as
confidence, we are simply not speaking in parrhesia.  We are charlatans!

Patience helps us overcome our ego, as I already mentioned.  When we
exchange views with someone, we do not try to out-compete them.  Such is
an expression of egoism.  Instead, we collaborate with them in pursuit
of a common cause: to jointly emancipate ourselves from falsehood; to
jointly discover some finer point of sophistication; to jointly partake
in the knowledge of a more profound insight.  If I have this attitude
and you show me how I am wrong, I will be very happy because you have
done me the great favour of freeing me from a misconception.  There is
no pettiness involved; pettiness which is concerned with "winning the
argument".  That is what the enemies of wisdom care about: the
appearance of winning when they are actually losing.

From ancient Greece, we know that this attitude of discoursively
approximating the truth is called "dialectic": a word which relates to
"dialogue" and means "through words" or "by means of discourse".

---

Dialectic is a fancy way of saying that we exchange views in a spirit of
honesty.  A "position" in Greek is a "thesis".  One side posits their
own thesis.  Another side propounds a different thesis.  As this other
thesis is presented in juxtaposition to the original one, it counts as
an "anti-thesis" (antithesis).  Both sides may converge to a position
somewhere between those two, so they have found a "syn-thesis"
(synthesis).  Or they may simply not find anything, in which case they
will continue searching.  Dialectic is all about patience.  There is no
ego involved.  No feeling of out-competing the other side.  The "I"
gives way to the "we".  We want to figure it out; we want to help each
other grow and develop further.

Let's consider an example that shows how dialectic is also practical.
Suppose we are now learning English.  We just got started.  We want to
try it in earnest but know our limits.  So we blithely say:

> I don't speak England very best! 😀

Some kind fellow corrects us.  They do not do it to tell us how foolish
we are.  They are genuinely eager to help.  And we accept their advice
since we are not attached to our position.  We do not want to win some
inane argument.  We only want to learn the language and accept our
ignorance.  We happily admit to our error and try to improve therefrom.

This aloofness is philosophical throughout.  We have the patience to
learn and exhibit the requisite selflessness.  We don't let our ego take
charge and tell lies.  We exhibit parrhesia, we remain inquisitive,
we are dubitative, and we operate dialectically.

---

Patience gives us four virtues of character that we would associate with
"philosophy" even in the conventional sense: parrhesia, dubitativeness,
inquisitiveness, and dialecticism.  We do not have to memorise such
technicalities.  All we need is patience.  I am just mentioning them so
that you can see how far this goes.  But wait!  I am not done yet.

Patience is the gift that keeps on giving.  Consider again this simple
example of learning a new language through trial and error.  We are not
committed to our thesis, to that which we state.  What we really want is
the truth which, in this case, is to learn how to properly express
ourselves in English so that we may communicate effectively.  This means
that we do not cling on to our current knowledge or ability.  We do not
make the mistake of considering it an extension of who we are.  We are
happy to let it go.  We understand that it is not ours: it is alienable,
meaning that it can be taken away from us.

Patience teaches us that many things we take for granted are, in fact,
alienable.  In case you watched my previous video, you may have noticed
one such example: my beard&#x2014;now it's gone!  When we have those
qualities of character I just mentioned we develop an understanding of
non-ownership.  The expression "my beard" is just a construct of
language.  It is not truly mine because I can exist without it or, more
generally, I can be conceptualised without it.

I lost my beard to an accident.  It caught fire, so I had to shave it
off.  I shaved again this morning because short facial hair is more
difficult to maintain in the summer.  The philosophical point is that I
didn't really lose anything because it was never mine by necessity.  If
I were to cling on it, I would be lacking parrhesia: I would not be
recognising the fact of non-ownership.  That would make sad about the loss.

---

Patience gives us the perspective of the bigger picture.  Just as how we
overcome the "I" and become "we" through dialectic, we no longer see
indelible lines between what is and isn't ours.  We understand that
everything is interconnected.  Why?  Because we take the time to observe
how things stand and we notice that nothing has a standalone presence.

There is no decontextualised self.  There is no "I" in a vacuum.
Everything that exists in some way, exists so in relation to other
presences.  Every presence has an environment, which comprises other
presences.  We already learnt about this through the example of our
excursion to the countryside.  While we were impatient, we could not see
anything.  Our experience was centred around a very narrow conception of
personhood.  It was all about our ego.  But as soon as we slowed things
down, as soon as we assumed the initiative, we began to notice the
flowers, and the bees, and the trees, and the sun, and the sky.  We
noticed how they all coexist.

Patience then gradually provides the profound insight that nothing
exists on its own and nothing truly owns its attributes as there are
environmental or contributing factors at play.  Patience thus leads to
the realisation that even the impression of self is not truly ours.  We
sense this the moment we escape from our ego.  As always, it starts with
the little things, such as when we recognise how another person needs to
express their individuality, or when we stare another deep into the eyes
and acknowledge how we are not the epicentre of the world.

Just as we escape from the pull of our ego in those moments, we can
overcome it completely.  That is the point when the notion of
non-ownership is fully embedded: our self is not "ours".  But we have to
start small.  Just as with learning a new language.  Patience is key.


## Philosophy is for everyone

Let me reiterate this point: philosophy is not a closed club for
eccentric intellectuals or academics with obscure interests.  Those
exist as well, but philosophy does not belong to them.  Wisdom is for
everyone and applies to everything.  You don't have to do presentations
such as this one to qualify as a philosopher.  You do not need to
communicate in a certain way to be a philosopher.  All you need is to
remain open to wisdom.

Philosophy is not about abstractions that exist "in the heavens", so to
speak.  It can be, though not exclusively.  With wisdom we change how we
behave in daily affairs.  We do everything thoughtfully.  All those
little things that your pedantic philosophy instructor at school would
not count as "philosophy": they are all philosophical throughout.

The philosopher who considers the abstractions is not limited to them.
Such a person can translate those insights into practical advice.
Think, for example, about non-ownership.  We can talk about it in the
most abstract ways, but we can also just relate it to facial hair.  Both
methods are equally good so long as we remain rooted in those qualities
of character that sustain our friendship with wisdom.  Do you think I am
fooling around when I tell you that "my beard" is not mine?  I am serious.

Thoughtfulness ultimately comes from patience.  When we are patient with
consistency, we are more focused, more considerate, less egocentric,
less arrogant.  In short, patience makes us better people.  We all
appreciate a friend who can listen to us and who knows us, a doctor who
is actually leading a healthy lifestyle instead of merely pontificating
about it, an artist who puts their heart into their art.  We like
thoughtfulness and people who don't let distractions lead them astray.

---

Patience liberates us from all sorts of misconceptions.  We are all well
aware of this prevalent notion of doing everything hard and fast.
People are peddling easy solutions and make promises that cannot be
realised.  They tell us how we can learn this super complex topic in
only a few hours.  Others guarantee immediate results to have the
"perfect body" just in time for the holidays.  Everyone is in a rush to
go somewhere.  Where exactly?  They do not know.

We can listen to all those distractions and waste years of our life
labouring towards unattainable goals.  Or we admit to the need for
patience.  We have to impose a structure and set priorities.  We must
pick something and stick with it for some time in order to evaluate it
better.  We have to let go of this opportunistic attitude of remaining
at the surface-level.  With superficialities we will never be happy with
ourselves because we will always be trapped in a cycle of constantly
chasing after stimuli that call for immediate action.  The reason we
cannot be happy is because these are infinite.  No matter how hard and
fast we go, we will never be fulfilled.

There are things in life which involve a degree of sophistication.  We
have to give them the attention they deserve.  Notice the word here:
"sophistication".  Does the "sophi" prefix sound familiar?  It should,
because it is the same *sophia* I have been talking about all this time.
Sophisticated is that which is characterised by throughtfulness; that
which is done in wisdom.

There is no magic trick to give us wisdom.  There is no shortcut that we
can take to become wise over the weekend.  No acid, no mushroom will do
it either.  Substances may help us break free from certain falsehoods,
but the rest comes from patience and the commitment it entails.

---

An aside here on the term "sophistication".  You will find its etymology
to have negative connotations as it is traced back to the Sophists.  The
Sophists were sages of antiquity.  We know from Plato's works about
Protagoras and Gorgias, both of whom were thoughtful individuals.  I
call them "sages", meaning wise people, because that is what they were.
But for whatever reason, due to differences of opinion and perhaps
political conflicts or other such pettiness, Sophists have been
misrepresented as charlatans.  There is the pejorative term of "sophism"
which signifies trickery and deceit.  This does an injustice to what the
leading figures of that tradition stood for, which was not an exercise
in dishonesty.

This is similar to how "cynicism", another important school of
philosophy, has been systematically derided through the aeons to the
effect that "cynic" and its derivatives are used as a very bad words
nowadays.

These are historical prejudices that have no place in a discussion that
is conducted with the qualities of character that spring from patience.
Remember that we develop dialectic to listen to what the other side has
to say.  If all we do is be bellicose or, as the ancient Greeks would
say, *eristic* (divisive or causing discord), we are not being honest.
Instead, we assume a position that we exalt as the single source of
truth and then fight everyone who disagrees with us.  We are not
conducting ourselves with parrhesia as we pretend to know more than what
we actually do.  We are being dogmatic.

Patience allows us to take a deep breath.  It lets us disengage from the
fray.  We do not want to merely react to stimuli.  We need to have
composure and thus presence and honesty and all of that.

---

As I said earlier in this presentation, do not let anyone belittle you.
You too can be a philosopher.  You start by learning to be patient.  You
figure out how to take things slowly.  You observe but refrain from
passing judgement.  You cannot yet be sure.  You have to wait.  By
maintaining this disposition, you gradually make a habit out of being
honest.  You do not lie to yourself, such as by pretending that you are
somehow special.  Eventually you develop skills that make you more
thoughtful.  You show compassion as you recognise the subjectivity of
others.  You give your full attention to what you are doing.  You stop
being an egoist.  You become more reliable and gain the trust of others.

You may still have reservations though.  It is understandable.  You pick
up some book that a philosopher wrote and do not understand what the
subject matter is.  Do not be discouraged.  As with everything, there
are those who are good teachers and those who are not.  And there are
topics which are for more advanced practitioners.

Do not make the mistake of conflating the main idea of "friend of
wisdom" with expertise.  All you need is to be more thoughtful in your
life.  You do not have to be a sage.  It does not matter.  Just imagine
how much more rewarding our experiences would be.  Have you ever talked
to someone who payed attention to all of your words?  Didn't that make
you feel respected?  Don't you want to have more of that in your life?
Wouldn't it be better if we all were more patient?

Wisdom is not a finite resource.  Remember that we do not really own
anything.  Befriend wisdom and you will notice how you start partaking
in wisdom in practical ways.  You will be wiser than before.  More
thoughtful, more sophisticated.  Please take it slow: one step at a
time.  How slow?  Don't worry about it.  It is the attitude that matters.

