---
title: "How (not) to be opinionated about art"
excerpt: "My reply on how to deal with a situation of judging works of art and handling relevant heated arguments."
redirect_from:
  - /advice/2021-11-07-art-opinions/
---

As with every other entry in this section, I publish an excerpt of an
email exchange with permission from my correspondent and without
disclosing any private information.

* * *

> You make references to painters, so I assume you know a few things
> about painting. [...]  We had a course on the history of art. [...]
> My problem is that people insist I have the wrong opinion when I tell
> them that I do not like Picasso's later works.  How can I convince
> them that I am not some heretic?

While this is about painting and aesthetic considerations, I feel it
could be generalised into a problématique on opinions in general.  So
you could wonder "how do I explain to people that they labour under
imperfect conditions?", or "how do I convince them that their opinions
do not spring from a state of omniscience?".

Here it is important to emphasise that we examine opinions.  For
example, we have facts about complementary colours like blue and orange
or blue and yellow, depending on the methodology.  Then we have opinions
on whether such combinations are pleasant or not, under which
circumstances, etc.  The term "opinion" entails an element of
uncertainty.  Even the specifics of the "fact" of complementary colours
change depending on the method we employ.  So even then we can still
make an argument that some degree of uncertainty is involved, although
we have gone to great lengths to minimise it, have strong evidence to
justify our beliefs, and so on.

[ That ultimately raises the question of what is knowledge, but let us
  not spend the rest of our life here---if you ever figure it out, make
  sure to contact me.  I'll buy the drinks! ]

In practical terms, we distinguish between matters of fact and opinion
based on the reproducibility of results delivered by a given method.  If
the method is shown to yield consistent findings, then we assign more
value to whatever insights we infer from its application than we do to
any random claim on the matter.

Uncertainty is not a given value, but an indeterminate range thereof.
There can be many levels of doubt, even for otherwise reproducible
findings.  We must thus not fall into the trap of mapping exactly how we
know the unknown, which means that we ought to keep an open mind about
our methods, as we might have to revise them when some new piece of
information becomes available to us (perhaps because someone else shows
us a better way of doing things, or some innovation enables a new
perspective on how to make sense of the issue).

The way you describe your predicament suggests that we are dealing with
an implicit claim that art can withstand objective measurement.  Is that
the gist of it, or did I misunderstand you?  Can we produce a scoreboard
and hold that Picasso scores a perfect 100 while Cézanne gets a solid
90?  How do you benchmark those?  And not just the whole corpus of each
artist's labour, but how do you compare two individual paintings
especially when those are from different eras, follow distinct trends,
and so on?  To not belabour the point: I hold that art is subjective.

There are, in my view, two broad types of subjectivity, by which we may
estimate the approximate worthiness of a painting (and of any work of
art in general, though let's keep it focused on what you asked):

+ The first is the historical view, or else the collective subjectivity,
  the general consensus.  It answers questions such as "what was the
  impact of this painting in the history of art?", "how did the
  painter's peers perceive of it?", "in which ways did it change the
  painter's livelihood, if any?".  In essence the historical view is the
  intersubjective one: how people, in their relations, assign value to a
  painting and what is the substance of said "value".  There is a
  dynamic aspect to it as well, so not just how that valuation took
  place at one point in time, but how it took form and continues to
  unfolfds over time, such as between generations.

+ The second is the personal view of whether a given painting can
  withstand the test posed by the question "can I tolerate having this
  in my room, where I will be looking at it all day?".  This is more
  straightforward, though it too is not absolute---subjectivity,
  remember.  People change and so do their preferences.

Couched in those terms you can say, for example, that in light of the
first type of subjectivity you do recognise that Picasso had a major
impact on the history of art because of X, Y, Z.  However, for the
second type, the personal subjectivity, you could remark that you would
still not want to have painting P in your room, as you find its colours
too intense, its shapes too stark, etc. and it would be disturbing you.

Your own opinion does not annul the general consunsus, nor does the
zeitgeist control your views.  Those can co-exist without conflicting
with some underlying objectivity, for there is none to be determined
with a sufficient degree of precision.  Any attempt at delineating the
boundaries and modalities of such an objective condition would
constitute another manifestation of subjectivity, as I already alluded
to by the scoreboard example.  Though I would be happy to be proven
wrong by dicovering that art is objective, with subjectivities being
expressed as epiphenomena of an otherwise immutable or determinable
reality.

The exact argumentation does not matter that much.  My emphasis is on
the underlying rationale.  The point is to be clear about your method
and to recognise the subjectivity of the endeavour.  To me this seems
like a fair approach.  If your peers insist that you are absolutely
wrong and will not entertain any of your counter-arguments, ask them
what their method is.  Maybe they know something you don't.  Be genuine
about it: if they do have some insight, then you really need to know
what it is, as it will make your life better---it will upgrade your
aesthetic sense, so to speak.  If, however, their certitude is nothing
but dogma, do not hesitate to challenge them to rethink their approach.

Those granted, you did not clarify what your relationship with those
people is.  Are they colleagues, family?  Could it be your seemingly
abusive crush (and friends) that you keep forgiving because of the
feeling of infatuation that you have towards that person?  There is no
need to give me the details---I would still tell you that what matters
is to get in the right frame of mind and think things through yourself.
Be dispassionate about it.

Regardless of what this relationship is, why do they even insist on such
an otherwise inconsequential point?  I consider it "inconsequential"
since you do not seem to be tackling the underlying themes the way a
philosopher or art historian/critic would.  I did not get the impression
that you are deeply invested in this inquiry.  Instead, you seem to be
caught up in an argument and are just too stubborn to back off.  Please
correct me if I am wrong.  Again, what is your relationship with those
people and how it influences your dispositions towards each other?

As I have wrote several times before (e.g. [The Dialectician’s
Ethos](https://protesilaos.com/books/2020-09-30-ethos-dialectic/), [Why
I won't compete with
you](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-06-20-no-competition-with-you/)),
when we are interested in the truth, we do not care about winning the
argument.  Such is a false goal.  What we want is to find out what the
case is.  If we have to let go of our thesis in the face of cogent
counter-arguments, then so be it.  We do it with alacrity exactly
because it is not our thesis that matters.  It is not about impressing
others with our intelligence, the inane pseudo-virtue of showing an
unflinching commitment to our ideas, the ability to engage in an
argument...  None of that matters!  All we want is the truth.  If the
way to the truth is blocked by our stubborness to hold on to a given
position, then we must recognise what the problem is, admit to be wrong,
and proceed fearlessly in our quest for approximating the truth.

Finally, I will put this down for the record, though it might not apply
to your case.  Sometimes we find ourselves around people that we try to
befriend but know deep down that things are not working despite our best
intentions and efforts.  We continue to be friendly due to a misplaced
sense of honour, yet we actually dread being there and are too cowardly
to admit as much to ourselves---such an admission should provide the
impetus for corrective action.  If no sensible approach works and they
keep bullying you, then take it as a sign that those people are not your
friends or not worth staying close to.  You tried your best, exhausted
all the options, but they clung on to their negative attitude and
continued harassing you.  The philosophical thing to do when every
appeal to reason fails is to send them all to hell.  Tell them to fuck
off.  Yes, I mean that.  The philosopher knows when to quit the
dialogue, stop talking about dubitativeness and such lofty standards,
and take decisive action.  The philosopher understands that we are only
human, not some perfectly rational, or moral, or aesthetic, or whatever,
agents.  Those who think that we are pure love, pure reason, and other
such fancies, are in for a rude awakening.
