---
title: "On the frame of mind for university and career choices"
excerpt: "My reply on how to approach the complex issue of university studies followed by career decisions."
redirect_from:
  - /advice/2021-11-06-university-career-choice/
---

I recently received an email where the person asked me about how to
approach university studies with regard to making a career.  I asked for
permission to reproduce the relevant parts, while removing all
personally identifying information.

* * *

> I am hoping you can enlighten me once again with your wisdom! Since
> speaking to you, I've realized that I am temperamentally similar to
> you when it comes to education. So I want to ask: What do you think of
> students chasing their interests and passions — no matter how vaguely
> they've defined it to themselves — as the strategy from transitioning
> from university to finding a living (e.g. career)?  The thinking often
> presented to me is that if you do this you will not only be more
> fulfilled but you can turn that interest into something profitable or
> marketable.

Let me abstract this a bit just so that we get into the right frame of
mind.  In order to determine whether what we do is fulfilling we must
apply a basic technique of identifying the actual goal and then
assessing the adequacy of the means used to pursue it.

Say you are a creative person and you want your creativity
(e.g. writing) to be part of what you do.  You must then ask what are
the prerequisites for reaching that objective.  Once you know those, you
proceed to find the factors that are specific to your case, which frame,
inform, influence, or otherwise condition the relationship between the
means and the end.

In this example of expressing yourself through writing: the goal is to
fill an inner need of creativity because, say, it makes you happy and
keeps you calm.  The means can be through a private diary or a blog.
Then comes the environment: are the people that surround me facilitating
or inhibiting my means and thus preventing the realisation of the end?
Is my current lifestyle suitable for what I want to do?  And if not,
then what exactly can be changed for me to be able to accomplish what I
want?

The "what I want" is not always obvious, nor static, nor known in
advance.  We can always have false wants or desires we once thought
would be good for us yet turn out to be unfulfilling.  So we must remain
mindful of our condition, such as by being honest to ourselves: is what
I am doing right now making me happy?  Is it sufficient for what I am
trying to do?  Can I improve upon it?

Now to the more specific points.  We all go to university because it is
a de facto requirement for having a better chance in the labour market.
Yes, the university is about becoming a better version of yourself
through studying but if that were the only goal we could apply the
aforementioned technique and ask whether the means---the formal
studies---are appropriate for the task, given one's condition.  The
university is more than that, it provides you with a certificate which
functions as a pass for certain jobs/careers.  Without that pass it is
practically impossible to enter and be employed in those sectors.

So now we introduce the realities of the modern world, of finding a job,
being able to pay the bills, etc.  These requirements must now be
accounted for when inquiring about the factors that constitute the case
we are immersed in.  In other words, how does the search for a job, the
need to feed myself, and so on, relate to my goal of creative writing?
Must I combine the two to be happy?  Will I still be happy if I just get
a job that pays well, but otherwise have no outlet for my creativity?

What matters here are not the answers but the method.  We want to know
how things stand and we want to know how we are in relation to them or
because of them.

To help us clarify our thoughts, it is appropriate to conduct thought
experiments, with the proviso that they always are a simplification of
reality and must thus not lead us into misunderstandings.  Here is one
such thought experiment: you have found the magic lamp which holds a
genie that can grant you one wish among a given set of predetermined
choices.  The genie asks you what do you want the most?  Or, in other
words, it encourages you to set your priorities.  Do you want to (1)
satisfy your inner need for creativity, (2) be rich, (3) become famous,
(4) wield power?  When you try to answer this question also try to put
an order to your preferences so that, e.g., I want the freedom of
expression above all, then I am okay with making some money, but I don't
care about fame and power.

This prioritisation helps with the assessment we do about the means, the
ends, and the constitution of our case (how the prevailing conditions in
our life inform those magnitudes).  Once we have the priorities in
order, we test whether we can combine them.  Can I get a job that
satisfies my creativity and provides a decent income?  If not, can I get
a job which does not inhibit my creativity and pays decently?  And you
continue running through the various scenaria.  If you can combine
different goals then you go with that approach.  If, however, you reach
a point where you have to forgo something, if the trade-off is
inescapable, you must be very honest about your priorities and choose
the one you prefer the most.

Note what I wrote above:

> The "what I want" is not always obvious, nor static, nor known in
> advance.

This is important because sometimes we reach a dead-end and may become
desperate to find a way out.  This is done by taking a step back and
reconsidering our means and goals in light of the constitution of the
case.  It might be that what we once desired the most was not really of
our own: it did not emanate from an inner impulse but was instead
induced by external influences (e.g. an external influence can be that
you want to be seen as having made a successful career because your
peers will think highly of you or because everyone else does that).  We
cannot always know beforehand whether the "what I want" is genuine and
complete, so we must exhaust all possibilities before going for the
'nuclear option'.

With those granted, and without knowing you too well to be able to make
specific comments, I say you should not be afraid to pursue your
interests and passions.  Chances are that those can also go together
with a decent job.  Though do bear in mind that people change and what
once interested you the most may one day not seem appealing.  Listen to
what others have to say, such as your professors and family, and try to
keep yourself in check by figuring out whether your interests/passions
are truly yours and how much you want to commit to them.  Sometimes
other people can help us gain a sense of perspective, so they may be
right.  Though there also exists the possibility that they are wrong, at
which point you must fearlessly mark your own path.

As already noted, this is not about giving you an answer, for that
requires knowledge of all the specifics.  Only you can know those (and
you need to be honest to yourself if you are to have a chance at finding
the right answers).  This is about outlining a method; a method to frame
those issues in order to make sense of them and decide on them
accordingly.
