---
title: "On the role of philosophy in the modern world"
excerpt: "My reply to a question about the utility of philosophy in the modern world of science and widespread expertise."
redirect_from:
  - /advice/2021-12-06-role-of-philosohy/
---

I received the following question in response to an older publication of
mine.  I asked for permission to reproduce the exchange, while omitting
any potentially personally identifying information.

* * *

> I always find it interesting when people try to find a place for
> philosophy in the present world, now that its domain has largely been
> superseded by science and its insights and methods are part of every
> rational field of inquiry. Leading experts in every field already use
> the rational methods developed historically in the philosophical
> tradition, to clarify concepts, look at the big picture, and discern
> patterns and connections. What role do you think philosophers should
> have in clarifying concepts, big picture thinking and discening
> patterns and connections that isn't already being done by scientists,
> leading experts, and non-expert commentary such as good journalism?

It is indeed true that science has superseded philosophy in every field
where statements can be verified.  And yes, it is the case that rational
methods, the clarification of concepts, et cetera, are not exclusive to
philosophy or philosophers.  Every field of inquiry, every area of
expertise exhibits that sort of rigour.  This is not a modern
development either, although it is more obvious nowadays.  From ancient
times we have had mathematicians, engineers, botanists, and so on:
experts in fields of endeavour where philosophy has no application or,
if it does, its extent is not immediately obvious.

To my mind, the enduring value of philosophy consists in its capacity to
abstract from the particulars and connect the dots between otherwise
disparate fields of knowledge.  The philosopher is often a polymath or,
in other words, polymaths have a propensity or ability to philosophise.
That may be because the collation of information renders conspicuous
patterns that are otherwise not possible or easy to discern; patterns we
may reason about in order to gain insight into some hitherto obscure
theme.

Think, for example, how we got the idea of software freedom, since what
prompted your question were my musings about a relevant topic.  The
notion of free software is not inherent to programming, engineering, or
computer science, even though people in those disciplines may conceive
of it and reason about it.  The concept is made manifest by abstracting
from the particularities of coding and by drawing linkages with other
aspects of human collective experience as pertaining to coding but also
in general, to eventually realise what the bigger picture is and where
things are going.

It is not the job of philosophy to charter such a new domain, as that is
a matter of a more specialised enterprise.  Contrary to science, whose
_positive_ claims are meant to be put to the test and ultimately
verified, philosophy's description of how things stand is speculative,
filled with doubt and subject to reconsideration.  At least as far as I
am concerned, the philosopher does not hide the fact that their role is
not to make a discovery down to the last detail but simply point towards
a direction that might hold mysteries yet to be revealed.

What philosophy continues to provide is its attitude, which we can
summarise as "scepticism" in the interest of brevity, although I
understand this is a somewhat overused and potentially imprecise term.
The philosopher's disposition is one of dubitativeness and
inquisitiveness where even one's own claims are taken with a grain of
salt.  Again, what I mentioned above on positive statements.

[ Read: [The Dialectician's Ethos](https://protesilaos.com/ethos-dialectic) (2020-09-30) ]

Science as such is underpinned by the same virtues.  It too is a
sceptical endeavour equipped with a methodological framework for the
assessment of hypotheses/claims about states of affairs.  Though here we
must introduce an important, yet subtle, distinction between science and
scientists (just as we can for philosophy and philosophers---not every
philosopher is consistently philosophical in their disposition).  There
are scientists who go into science for its economic or social benefits;
people who in their everyday life qua scientists do not practice the
virtues of science, such as by not listening in earnest to so-called
"heterodox" schools of thought within their field or by conflating the
popularity of ideas with their cogency, and so on.  Furthermore, we have
scientists who are not operating in the service of science, such as
those who are paid handsomely to produce dubious research for the sole
purpose of supporting the agenda of some industry (e.g. tobacco, coal
and oil companies, etc.).

Some scientists are like the doctor who advises against smoking yet
requires a short break to light a cigarette.  The point is that we
should not assume that every individual _lives_ in accordance with
science just because of the fact that they have the technical training
of a scientist.  Put differently, science has an _ethos_ associated with
it, where "ethos" refers to the intersubjective character of a person:
the way one's actions relate to others and the overall qualitative
aspects of those relations.  Such an ethos requires consistency.

[ Read: [Notes on Science and Scientism](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-04-28-notes-science-scientism/) (2021-04-28) ]

This brings us to another function of philosophy, which Socrates
described as that of a "social gadfly".  Maybe this is not the prettiest
image to think about or even the most apt metaphor, though it does speak
of how the philosopher must sometimes be a nuisance who reminds people
that they are not operating within their limits or in accordance with
the precepts they purport to live by.  The philosopher can assume that
role by means of tracing those abstract patterns I alluded to earlier,
though not for the sake of pontificating on what the single source of
truth is but only to keep people in check, else to keep them honest.

Consider, for instance, the ever-practical economist who claims to only
care about facts yet blithely proceeds to draw models that assume human
agency as perfectly rational (the chimera of _homo economicus_).  The
2008+ global financial crisis can, in a way, be described as a systemic
failure of overconfidence in our abilities and state of knowledge.  It
was a brand of cockiness not too dissimilar to this unflinching
commitment to---indeed the _faith_ in---a purely factual exchange.  The
economist who only cares about facts cannot possibly listen to their
philosophising peer who points out the underlying hypocrisy of said
cockiness: the opinion that maybe we don't know as much as we think we
do.

At times we must plot a course of action with the understanding that we
labour under imperfect knowledge, where the acquisition of a fact is not
tenable.  Anticipating when to suspend one's own rules and how exactly
to reassess them in light of the specific constitution of the case they
find themselves in, is a matter of preemptive judgement, indeed
prudence, not factual analysis.

It is in those cases where philosophy can remind people of what they are
supposed to be doing.  To rekindle the scientist's commitment to
science, to its ethos, and to insist that one should not cling on to the
technicalities of a method to the point where they forget about its
inherent meaning, about the disposition towards knowledge and learning
that does not take itself as flawless and its findings as final.

Put concretely, philosophy will be irrelevant once the attitude of
philosophising consistently becomes the norm.  This is not to imply that
philosophers are a special breed of intellectual or that philosophy must
somehow be granted the authority to issue edicts on how everyone should
behave---that would just make philosophers cocky and prone to the hubris
I implied.  If anything, the opposite is true as philosophy outside the
narrow confines of an academic career (the academy is not all that
philosophy is about) is a thankless task that leads to marginalisation
and impoverishment.  So I am not defending philosophy in the same way
one justifies an established order on the premise of not destroying
employment positions or simply protecting one's social standing.

Every interested party can philosophise, provided they put in the
requisite effort (which is true for everything that involves a degree of
sophistication).  We will be better off once the distinction between the
scientist or expert and the philosopher is no longer meaningful.  Are we
there yet?  I don't know.  My encounters with experts of all sorts tell
me that we probably have ways to go, though that may not be the case or
general trend.
