---
title: "On honesty and my creative process"
excerpt: "An explanation of how I produce my writings and why I do them this way."
---

I got the question "what is your creative writing process?" via a
private channel.  Below is my reply.  The identity of my correspondent
remains private, while this is shared with permission.

* * *

There is a technique in painting known as _alla prima_, meaning "at the
first [attempt]".  The artist starts a painting and finalises it in one
go.  They won't let the oil colours dry and will only lay more strokes
on top of them while they are still wet.  It is all done in a state of
flux.  The end result is a product of the moment.  My writings over the
last years are alla prima as well: they are written in a single session.

My technique is not spontaneous though, if by "spontaneous" we mean just
sitting and writing random words.  (Nor is the painter spontaneous in
this regard.)  I do think carefully about the topics I cover.  Though I
never put premature thoughts into writing.  I do not take what I call
"prior notes" and never keep records of incomplete ideas.  I do not
maintain an outline of topics to cover and do not use to-do lists or
anything to that end.  For my work, prior notes hold me hostage to a
version of myself that was not yet aware of the relevant concepts.  I
don't want relatively "ignorant me" to dictate or foreshadow what
"knowledgeable me" will do.

Instead of capturing prior notes, I walk.  I walk a lot.  This is
literal, but also figurative as in remaining aloof.  I keep an idea in
the background while I go hiking.  It is "there" and is taking form,
though I do not bring it to the foreground.  I let it grow organically
until it is ready.  In the meantime, I will enjoy the moments that
nature gives me: the calmness of the forest, the vastness of the
horizon, the playfulness of the birds, the company of my dog.  It is all
I can get.

Walking keeps me focused on the immediate experience, while it leaves
sufficient space for the background concepts to mature.  I am not
troubled by anything else and can thus expend my energy in a way that
works for me.

Until the idea is finalised in my head, it is only mentioned in
tangential works.  I basically leave hints here and there of what I am
thinking about, until I eventually dedicate a standalone publication to
it.

The physical exercise, in combination with my discipline, and my strict,
healthy habits, keeps me sharp.  The body and the mind are part of the
same system.  Their distinct names are analytical constructs for us to
communicate.  I can create because my condition makes it possible.  To
put it poetically, the soul needs a vessel through which it is
expressed, so I might as well take care of it.

When I do write, I deliver what is a snapshot of myself.  I want it to
have logical as well as emotional coherence.  There is spiritual unity
embedded therein.  It is who I am in that moment.  The authentic me,
unencumbered by perfectionist concerns or fancies of appearing in a
certain way to a given audience.

For me, this coherence is consistent with my philosophy-as-practice,
which is based on patience and is made manifest with honesty.  I have
observed that if I write, say, three paragraphs on a given topic right
now, and three more on the same topic in a month from now, they will
differ considerably.  Maybe a third party cannot notice, but I do.  Why
they differ?  Because of all the factors that contribute to my mood,
ability to write, state of knowledge, and so on.  The authors are
essentially different, although both are emanations of this dynamic "I"
narrative I am maintaining and continuously developing.

Without coherence of this sort, I have nothing.  I feel I am but a
robot.  The machine may still produce useful works, but it lacks the
human element of ad-hoc creativity that I want to incorporate in my
publications.

I can afford to do this as I only write for myself on my own website.  I
do not have a publisher or editor to worry about.  There is no
contractual obligation.  Or obligation of any sort for that matter, as I
don't have a target audience in mind.  I do not care if the writing is
impeccable---it never is.

I am not counting the technical documentation and my programs as part of
the "creative writing process".  Those are produced for the benefit of
others, so I have to prioritise usability over other qualities.  I still
like them for different reasons that are not pertinent to the present
entry.

You may have noticed that my video recordings, such as those I do on
philosophy, are imperfect.  I make errors, mispronounce words, and will
even fix a typo while doing the recording.  As for the video itself, it
is also done alla prima.  Yes, even those which are one-hour-long.  I
simply start and hope for the best.

"Why aren't the videos of a higher quality?" you may wonder.  Because
"higher quality" is not authentic, notwithstanding the capabilities of
my hardware.  The unfiltered version is who I am.  If I have to edit a
statement ten times, then I do not show you my reality.  Imagine the
disconnect between the substance of my philosophy and the disgustingly
flawless video production that would go with it!

I thus want the viewer/reader/listener to feel my words and behaviour.
I am not merely speaking to their mind, but am also connecting with
their heart.  At least such is my wish.  Just as I am authentic, I want
to attract honest people, meaning those who will communicate with me in
a spirit of dubitativeness and inquisitiveness: not to impress me, not
to flatter me, but perhaps to share with me something interesting,
something sincere.  "Honest people" does not mean that they have to
share their identity and/or private life with me.  I only want fellow
travellers: may they remain hidden behind an alias---it does not bother
me.

My works must also be a depiction of me, as I have no other outlet to
express myself.  They have to offer me that freedom.  One part of it is
my philosophy, while the other is the practical measures I take to
remain sane.  Friends disappeared a long time ago, while people in my
milieu cannot connect with me: we have different interests, while they
never look past my superficial features.  To them I only exist as
someone who walks but who says nothing beside "hi".  For even when I
speak, they do not listen, as they immediately change the subject.

By being honest through my writings, I do what would otherwise be
impossible: show myself.  In practice, I am invisible and unnoticeable.
A random villager in some typical mountain.  No-one pays attention to
that.  There is nothing special about it.  Folks need something a bit
more fancy.  At least such is the bias of those I encounter.  I cannot
give them good looks, a mesmerising performance, or whatever the "wow"
factor is measured in.  As for the substance of what I can say, no-one
is eager to consider it and to join me in my explorations.

I have never met someone who has the same disposition as I do.  Not
skill, not mental fortitude, not knowledge, just disposition---it is all
I care about.  Show me the right attitude!  Do it in earnest.  The rest
is not important.

Those self-professed enlightened fellows who tried to sound profound in
order to impress me quickly realised that their gimmicks could not work
on me.  I would not challenge them as I had hope for them.  I would
simply speak and they would notice...  They probably left in hope of
trying their luck on more impressionable listeners.  Though I would have
been alone even if they had stayed; alone in my endeavours.  Not by
choice.  Not by design.  Not because I do not care about people.
Loneliness is part of the deal, it seems.  So I walk with no clue of
where I'm going.

Honesty, then.  Who would I be without it?  What would I even do?

**UPDATE 2022-09-01 09:17 +0300:** I explain more about some of these
personal themes in my video on philosophy: [The presumptive idol of
you](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-30-presumptive-idol/).
