---
title: "On alcohol and sex"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal about why I quit alcohol and how it related to my experiences with sex."
---

The following is an excerpt from my journal with some details edited
out.  It obviously is intended for a mature audience though I try to
remain generic.

* * *

Alcohol played an important role in my life.  It was pertinent to
romantic escapades and the act of having sex.

My story begins when I was 10+x and the other person was 10+x+1.  I
didn't know what I was doing, though they did, which helped greatly.  I
was drinking shots of vodka for the first time.  It was like my throat
was burning and I was feeling dizzy afterwards.  I fancied "blue eyes"
though I did not know what that actually entailed.  I only knew how to
talk and, perhaps, tell the occasional joke.  After 3 or 4 shots, I sat
in a corner and drank some water.  I also put a bit on my face.  It
helped me regain my senses, although I was still not fully in control.
"Blue eyes" realised I had gone missing from the group and came
searching for me.  I was just at the other end of the room.  We
exchanged a few words and then went outside to sit on the grass under a
tree.  The fresh air helped a lot.  We talked, joked, pushed each other
playfully, and then...  coordinated silence.  Do you know that moment
when the person's eyes are too beautiful, you want to look away, but
they still captivate you and you just remain still?  It is how I felt.
They approached me and kissed me on the chick.  That was new.  I liked
it and asked if I could do the same, which I did.  It snowballed from
there.  Things happened with me following the person's gentle guidance.

Sex and alcohol would go together.  The night at the park where we
escaped to with "M"... we had told our respective friends that we were
going to bed early, only to meet at our secret place.  An innocuous lie
to find some solitude---they should never learn about it!  The carton of
wine with the two plastic cups was waiting for us there.  I still
remember the bad taste of that cheap plonk.  It was funny as we clearly
were not there for the drink.  We just had to manage and we did.

There was this other time when I discovered sambuca and experienced a
certain pair of amber eyes in a different way than usual.  We all met at
the friend's place, gathered in a circle, poured sambuca in a pan and
lit it on fire.  With a quick motion we would put our finger in the pan
and would then lick the sambuca we had collected.  It's a gimmick, sure,
though it helps awkward strangers feel more relaxed.  We eventually
switched to vodka...  After a while, someone had the idea that we should
head to the beach.  We walked there as a group.  Upon arrival we broke
into smaller groups and each went their own way.  My friend had
abandoned me to run after his crush...  It worked for him, which is
great.  Though fuck that guy for always being in love with someone and
leaving me alone!  "Amber eyes" joined me as I was walking along the
seaside.  We walked until we were far away from the others, and just sat
at the sand.  It was dark.  I still had not understood what was going on
and was just talking, while still holding a cup of vodka in my hand.
Things became serious very quickly in a blend of passion and
drunkenness.

This pattern can be discerned throughout the years.  Alcohol taking me
places...  I wasn't always thoughtful.  I just went through the motions
and did what was the expected behaviour.  Alcohol lowers your defences,
which can be good as you stop being pretentious.  Though it also makes
you less aware of certain important details, such as your emotional
state during sex.  There is short-term excitement, yes, though you then
forget about it as you are intoxicated and barely hanging on to your
senses.

At some point I started thinking about my actions.  I could no longer be
mindless because it was impossible to undo what I had understood.  I
noticed how getting drunk was a precondition for certain experiences.
Why?  Why can't we jointly lower our defences while being sober?  Why
can't we connect emotionally beside the physical act?  What's so
difficult about being sincere?  I want to learn what you think, to
explore your world, and to gain your trust as you reveal to me who you
really are.  Admit to your feelings in the here-and-now.  You don't need
some special substance for that.  Having it only detracts from the
experience.

I had developed tolerance for alcohol.  I was used to drinking spirits
neat (no ice or extras), with whiskey being my favourite.  This meant
that I was in control relative to those who would approach me after a
few drinks.  I saw people in a new light.  I could still be attracted to
someone, but I decided not to give in.  Not while they were in that
state, anyway.  There was a disconnect.  With sex, we would occupy the
same space physically, but due to alcohol we would each be in our own
little bubble.  I felt that getting drunk was reducing me to a fucktoy.
I did not like it anymore.

My affair with another "blue eyes" who was my age plus 10 was
alcohol-free by serendipity.  There were hugs, kisses, and a lot of
talking.  A slow process.  Although brief due to reasons outside our
control, the affair felt authentic.  Afterwards I wondered why that was.
The person was not more attractive than the others, nor necessarily more
thoughtful.  I was not feeling more excited than other times.  I think
they were genuine because they acted deliberately.  Each kiss felt
better than usual as it was given the attention it deserved.  We were
present.

When this happened a second time, I confirmed what I was already
suspecting: alcohol was only helping superficially.  When people are
drunk, they are more likely to do things they otherwise wouldn't, but
they stay at that level without any profundity to it.  Though the people
who do what they must deliberately...  That's special.

I stopped attending parties that promised "free drinks and pretty
girls".  I could not fake it.  It took me a while to quit alcohol for
good, though I did it and felt better for the immediate health benefits,
for remaining honest, and for seeking authenticity in all experiences.

We ask questions and provide answers.  Each sets their priorities.
Those who have regrets renege on their decision.  The rest are too
stubborn or, perhaps, "romantic" if you want to put a positive spin on
it.  One cannot rewrite the past.  We can only learn and, hopefully, do
the right thing.  Is there a deeper truth to be had?  I don't know.
