---
title: "Re: How do I feel less alone?"
excerpt: "My reply to a question I received about how to deal with solitude or loneliness."
---

I received the titular question.  My reply is reproduced below.  The
identity of my correspondent shall remain private.

* * *

Hello there!  You ask a difficult yet crucial question.  You did not
provide any further information on your condition, so I can only comment
on the general theme.

Your question uses the word "alone".  There is a distinction to be made
between solitude and loneliness.  Solitude is when you are literally
alone, isolated in some place with no kind of interaction with anyone.
Whereas loneliness is a state of mind where we feel that no-one among
those we otherwise interact with is actually close to us and truly
understands us.

If you are in solitude, try to seek human interaction.  This can be done
by physically putting yourself in places where others are, such as by
joining a club, or virtually by participating in communities that share
the same interests you do.  If you have relatives, friends, neighbours
you can talk to, make an effort to that end.  Other activities you can
do, depending on the specifics of your locality, is to volunteer for
social work.  Even if you are not religious, go help with the
maintenance of the nearby shrine, help the elderly with gardening, and
the like.  It does not really matter what you do, as long as you find
that human connection.

In the past, I volunteered to help religious people with certain tasks.
Not because I believed in their religion.  I just wanted to return to a
benign equilibrium of sociability (because of what I explained here:
<https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2022-09-11-dealing-with-depression/>).
I won't go into the specifics, as I did not do it to brag about it.  The
point is that it worked: I no longer was in solitude.

Loneliness is harder to deal with.  I am afraid I have no answer on how
to "fix it".  If I knew, I would have done it myself: I have been lonely
for a long time.  What you can do is develop mental tools to cope with
it.  The core idea is to learn how not to worry about it.

Start by not blaming yourself.  All sorts of people can feel lonely at
different points in their life.  There is nothing inherently broken or
wrong with them.  Remember that loneliness is when we are not understood
by others or are not close to them.  This can even happen to people who
are super popular, pretty, et cetera.  I guess you watched this closely
related philosophical presentation I did on "the presumptive idol of
you", but I am linking to it just in case:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-08-30-presumptive-idol/>.  Again,
don't blame yourself and think you are defective.

Secondly, be honest with yourself about things you can improve.  For
example, do you have good manners?  If not, try to work on them.  Do you
stay clean?  If not, make sure to take a shower each day and be on point
with your hygiene.  More generally, work on yourself.  Treat your body
as a temple: it is not a coal mine.

Thirdly, remove whatever stigma you still associate with loneliness.  If
you think that your condition is bad, you remain in that state of either
blaming yourself or not working to improve what you can.  You are thus
violating the previous two points.

Fourthly, do not develop any false sense of entitlement or, anyhow, do
not believe that you deserve attention, friendship, companionship,
romance, or whatever.  Human relations involve mutual feelings.  Even if
you work on yourself, it does not mean that others will treat you the
way you want.  In other words, acknowledge that this is an interpersonal
phenomenon: it is outside your control and you should not think it is
strictly yours (also watch my video about "harmony, tranquillity, and
non-ownership":
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-09-22-harmony-tranquility-non-ownership/>).

Whatever you do, keep your expectations in check and be reasonable.
Adopt an incrementalist method whereby you make small and steady
changes.  For example, on improving yourself: don't say that you will
start walking for an hour a day and go with that.  If you are not
already used to it, it is not sustainable.  Go for 5 minutes instead,
but do it everyday: the key is consistency.  When that routine becomes
the new normal, stretch its duration to 10 minutes, and repeat the
incrementalist process.  Then go for 20, and so on until you reach a
realistic target that is contributing to your wellness and which you can
maintain.

I sense that loneliness is something you cannot overcome because it does
not depend only on you.  You can learn to live with it and be okay with
yourself.  Is this a happy message?  No.  Is there no way to remove
loneliness altogether?  I do not know, dear.  If there is a way, I am
not aware of it.  If you find it, please tell me as I need it too.
Until then you must cope with it.
