---
title: "On dog-related misconceptions"
excerpt: "Answers to common questions I get about dogs."
---

Unlike other entries in [this section of my
website](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/), this is not a reply to
any particular email or message.  It rather addresses some persistent
questions I receive as a long-time dog handler.

* * *

## Does it bite?

This question has two meanings: the general about all dogs and the
particular about my dog.

Let us tackle the general case first.

Yes, all dogs can bite.  Why do you think they have these bone-crushing
jaws?  They are carnivores.  They have the anatomy and instincts of an
apex predator.  In the interest of brevity, let's just say they are
domesticated wolves.

The wolf analogy is a useful approximation, though we should not take it
at face value.  Dogs have lived with humans for tens of thousands of
years.  Breeding (i.e. human selection instead of the natural one) has
given rise to types of dog that deviate considerably from the _canis_
archetype of the wilderness.  Some breeds are more docile than others,
but all retain a kernel of the animal's wild nature.  This is made
manifest in a variety of situations, depending on the dog's breed but
also their upbringing.

Dogs will bite as the final act of self-defence, or when hunting, or
while fighting with other dogs over territory, resources, breeding
rights.  Any dog can and will bite given the right circumstances or
triggers.  A non-exhaustive list of body language you should be aware of
(these may appear together, though not always---it is important to
understand the situation):

* Open, upright posture that makes it look big.
* Tail is raised and pointed.  A wagging tail is not friendly in this
  context.
* Constant growling or barking while not backing off.
* Wrinkled forehead.
* Raised back hair.
* Locked straight eye contact.

As a variation of the above, a dog may be in a defensive position: it
lowers its body and head, puts its tail between its hind legs and grawls
or barks while exposing its front teeth, including the gums.

Don't conflate the potential for biting with innate aggressiveness.  A
dog will not bite without communicating its intent.  I hear stories that
a dog just "snapped" and attacked someone.  I don't believe them.  In
all the years I have experienced dogs I have never witnesses such
apparently inexplicable or insane behaviour.  It is more likely that
those reporting the stories simply ignored the visual cues and body
language of the animal.  It is okay to admit ignorance of a dog's
complex modes of communication.  But it is outright irresponsible to
spread misinformation.

[This picture is spot
on](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-v1HCSn5GHQY/VNQ41sdwhDI/AAAAAAAAACY/sI04b6Bn80g/s1600/CanineBodyLanguage.jpg).

To our point though: yes, dogs can bite.  Do not ever make the mistake
of thinking otherwise.  Dogs are not toys.  You don't get one as the
animate equivalent of your child's teddy bear, or as a fashion
accessory, or even to show your social status and how much of a badass
you think you are.  If you want a toy, buy a toy.  If you need some
fashion accessory---which you don't---acquire one.  And if you really
want to tell the world how much they should respect you, you can sod
off.  Life is simple.

Those granted, dogs are domesticated animals.  Their behaviour is in
large part moulded by their human companion and their immediate
environment.  If I see a dog that is aggressive and anxious around
people, I infer that it has been the subject of direct or indirect abuse
by its human.  The person neglected the animal's wellness: lack of
training, poor socialisation, and maybe even violent methods of
subordination (which some peddle as "pragmatic training techniques").

A well-trained dog that lives in a loving household should always be
comfortable around people and should never show signs of aggression for
no good reason.  Put differently, if the dog is aggressive and stressed
out, it most likely is not its fault.

Now the particular question about whether my dog bites.

Yes, it can bite.  The real issue though is whether I am treating it
properly and whether its upbringing makes it a good canine citizen or
not.  It is.  My dog would never bite on a whimsy because it is well
trained, is treated as an equal member of the family, and generally
leads a happy life.

What does "well trained" mean?  Without going into the technicalities,
consider those two simple yet insightful tests:

1. Does the dog walk by your side while on a leash?  Or is it constantly
   pulling in different directions?  If it is the latter, the dog is not
   well trained and/or does not get enough daily exercise.
2. Give the dog something delicious to chew on (e.g. a bone).  Let a
   minute pass and then put your hand in the dog's mouth to remove the
   item.  Can you do that?  If yes, it shows you are competent and the
   animal trusts in your judgement.  If you wouldn't even dare try
   something like this, you clearly are not in charge of things.  The
   dog is not trusting you and, by extension, will not provide prior
   assent to your calls.  In other words, the dog will act on its own at
   the worst possible time.

If the dog is not well trained, it likely is not properly socialised
either.  Which implies that it lacks confidence in its own means and
will be anxious and/or aggressive in various circumstances.  For small
dogs, this may not pose a problem.  The dog is still a threat, though a
minor one given its lack of sheer strength.  Whereas a powerful breed
with the same maladjusted behaviour is a potent threat and, by
extension, its human is, perhaps unwillingly, a menace to society.

To summarise:

* Dogs are domesticated predators.  Keep it real.
* Learn to read the visual cues.  Dogs are not bloodthirsty killing
  machines that "just snap" and bite people.
* Unlike predators in the wild, dogs are heavily influenced by their
  humans.
* An aggressive dog is the product of inadequate upbringing.  It can be
  due to ignorance, neglect, recklessness, or outright cruelty.
* If you do not understand the responsibility of handling a dog, you
  most definitely should not have one.

Those who try to paint a hagiographic picture of dogs as all-loving
cuties are doing us a disservice because their campaigns engender
unrealistic expectations among the general public.  Understand what a
canine is and then demand that its human assumes full responsibility of
living with a dog.

## Do its jaws lock?

There is this notion that the jaws of certain breeds/types of dog, like
a pitbull's, will lock in place while it bites, effectively making the
attack deadly.  As with all big lies, this too rests on a modicum of
truth:

1. Powerful dogs exert considerable force in their bite.  If you try to
   open their mouth without their cooperation, you will need to expend a
   great deal of energy.  Most humans are physically incapable of doing
   that.
2. A well trained dog should always---always!---open its mouth to its
   human (see previous section).  Otherwise the so-called "locked jaws"
   are a clear sign of failure to train the dog and tend to its needs.

Now a few words about pitbulls in particular.  Most dogs that are
described in those terms have little in common with the bull-and-terrier
that were used for bull baiting and dog fighting in yester centuries
(cruelty writ large!).  There are differences in breeding practices
though the single most important change is with how [most] humans treat
these animals: a canine that is perennially abused for the sole purpose
of a blood "sport" will always be lethal compared to a dog that is
raised in a loving and stable household.

Modern day pitbulls retain aggressiveness towards other animals, such as
cats, but are not human-aggressive.  If your dog is animal-aggressive,
it is your job to keep it in a controlled environment.  No amount of
training will eliminate the prey drive.

## Isn't raw meat making it more aggressive?

A lady asked me this question a few days ago.  She was walking a
Miniature Pinscher and I was with my dog who is highly athletic and
weights over 30 kilograms (mix of American Pitbull Terrier and German
Shepherd Dog).  To which I replied: will your dog become a wolf if I
feed it a bone?

In case you wonder, the answer is negative.  This is yet another one of
those persistent lies...  Raw meat does not turn dogs into wild beasts.
What is actually happening is that the dog has a latent prey drive that
may go unnoticed.

Even dogs with a high prey drive will not exhibit it from day one.  A
puppy may have to grow up to 5-9 months old before it starts showing its
true nature.  So if your cute little pup "suddenly" gives chase to a
bird, rabbit, rodent, or other animal it simply means that it is
maturing and its potentiality is being fulfilled.

Whether one should occasionally feed their dog raw meat or not is
another discussion altogether.  As are the egregious malpractices of the
meat industry and of every industry in the capitalist world for that
matter: we will always be having these kind of discussions for as long
as our kind sacrifices morality to the altars of short-term profit and
expedience.  But I digress.

The gist is that you should not panic if your dog eats raw meat.
Nothing changes.  If the animal is naturally docile, it will remain so.
If it is predatory towards other non-human species, it will stay that
way.  Whatever the specifics, remember that the human factor is of
paramount importance.  The animal's behaviour is still contingent on its
upbringing and day-to-day experience with its human[s].  It is the
person who has responsibility to keep the canine safe from trouble,
because animals do not share our sensitivities and have no interest in
our laws.

## Mixed-breeds are worse, right?

A purebred dog is one that conforms with a breed standard.  This is a
set of specifiers regulating the overall appearance of the animal.  They
are written by the kennel club associated with the breed in question.

Purity of breed is a human construct that does not necessarily predict
the dog's overall disposition and fitness for a given task.  In my
experience with shepherds, dogs are judged in accordance with their
ability to perform certain tasks.  If a dog can herd sheep, it qualifies
as a sheep-herding dog.  If it dares challenge a wild boar, it is a
catch-dog, and so on.  Conversely, if a canine that nominally counts as
a sheep herding breed (e.g. German Shepherd Dog) cannot actually herd
sheep, then it is of no use to a shepherd (notwithstanding other
considerations).  The shepherd needs to get the job done, not decorate
their wall with some breeder's pedigree.

Historically, there exist several land races, such as the Greek Shepherd
Dog (and its relatives in the Balkans).  Unlike modern established
breeds, those were developed over centuries without a central authority
checking whether a given specimen conformed with some standard for
height, weight, shape of ear, length of hair, and so on.  Rather than
focus on some bureaucratic standard, people looked at what the animal
could actually accomplish.

A breed standard is not bad per se.  It depends on how it is
interpreted.  What counts as purebred may be comparatively worse at any
given task than a cross-breed, mongrel, or mutt.  This is because a
narrow interpretation of a breed standard effectively diminishes the
gene pool, which in turn increases the risk of hereditary diseases.  On
the flip-side, a mix-breed does not necessarily get the best of both
parents.  One must check the specifics.

The term "pure breed" has some unfortunate connotations.  We associate
purity with quality and think that unless the dog is of some fine stock,
it cannot possibly be good enough for a given task.  The average person
should only care about the dog's recognisable breed when they have a
particular objective that is best met by certain types of dog.  For
example, Labrador Retrievers excel at numerous civil tasks, while
livestock guardians have the requisite disposition to deter wolves and
other predators.

Whatever the case, notice that I emphasised fitness for a given task.
All dogs are lovely and there is no such thing as an inherent
superiority or inferiority.  Just as how an exceptionally tall person
may be good at basketball but is not an innately better human than the
rest of us.

## Should I get a Malinois to have a good dog?

If you are asking this question, chances are you have fallen victim to
an invidious fad.  The Malinois and its Dutch relative have been hyped
to ridiculous levels as some kind of superdogs and now every ignoramus
wants one.  Yes, they are used for military and police work, though I
doubt anyone talking to me fits that designation.

Before getting any kind of dog, consider the following:

* How many _hours_ per day can you spare to cater to its needs?
* Are you prepared to organise your life around the dog?  Such as to go
  for a walk early in the morning and another one late at night.
* Can you assume responsibility for the wellness of another being, or
  are you the kind of person who can barely do the dishes?
* Are you willing to invest time in training your puppy and then in
  maintaining a healthy and loving relationship with the dog throughout
  its life?
* Do you understand that a dog needs you every single day?  It does not
  matter if it rains or there is snowfall: a walk is a walk.  Can you
  afford that kind of availability?
* Are you willing to commit a great deal of time to learn the fine
  details that are essential to your life with a dog?  Such as why it
  wants to chew on your shoe all of a sudden? (It asks to go out to
  urinate or defecate.  No worries though: it will eventually learn to
  communicate without becoming destructive.)

You get the idea: a dog is not a toy, as noted further above.  The
Malinois is no different in this regard.  What it requires on top of the
aforementioned is an experienced owner who understands what it means to
handle a working dog with a high output of energy.

If you are asking me whether you should get a Malinois (or Dutch
Shepherd), I must answer in the negative.  There are lots of wonderful
dogs out there, purebred or otherwise.  Ignore the hype.

## Protection training will save me, correct?

Assuming you can afford the exorbitant costs of a dog that is trained by
professionals as a personal guardian, I think the answer is nuanced.  A
dog can indeed deter opportunistic aggressors and a highly trained dog
will do so effectively.  However, no dog will ever stand a chance
against a determined, concerted attack against you.  As such, I suggest
you spend your money some other way.

For us ordinary folk who can't approximate such levels of expenditure,
it is better to think of protection training as yet another kind of
training: it is quality time you spend with your dog.  Consider it a
game or a hobby rather than preparation for some decisive confrontation.

Your dog may protect you in the same way a friend or relative might.  We
keep people we love close to us for who they are, not for that one
scenario where they save our life.  Same principle for your dog who, as
mentioned earlier, should be considered part of the family (or the pack,
if you will).

Again, no dog is a toy.  It is no weapon either.
