---
title: "On Cosmic transfiguration and the afterlife"
excerpt: "My reply to an email I received about whether there is an afterlife (and related themes)."
---

What follows is part of an email exchange.  The identity of my
correspondent shall remain private.  The subject of this email is
_"Prot, What happend to previously dead people our grandfathers,
forefathers?"_.

* * *

> - Where are they ?
>
> - Where are all the billions of dead peoples our forefathers?
>
> - I was shocked . There is group of real scientist, doctors ,
> psychologist , researching after life, when they found most of patient
> usually children who give details , family secret, names, of people or
> place they never heard, never gone to. what do you think what is this
> prot?
>
> If there is like say after life, where are billions of people who
> died? or new who are new born? as population is increasing .
>
> Do you have any video about this prot?

Starting from the end: no, I do not have a video on this topic.  Though
I will speak my mind about it.

As I told you in a previous message, I am of the view that there is no
true birth or death in the Cosmos.  Everything is subject to
transfiguration.  The same underlying substance takes forms which are
deconstructed and reconstituted as new instances.  A cycle everlasting.
This is part of what I said in my video on "Cosmos, Logos, and the
living universe" and which I will hint at throughout the rest of my
commentary herein:
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-05-cosmos-logos-living-universe/>.

What I mean by that is that everything necessarily comes from something
and goes into something.  It is impossible for something to come from
nothing, to be in nothing, and to go towards nothing.  This applies even
to the Christian God who is claimed to have created the world "from
nothing": it cannot be true because God is not nothing (so if God is the
starting point, it still counts as "something").

From our perspective, birth and death are realities.  They mark the
boundaries of a certain phase during which a particular form is made
manifest.  They are not the "beginning" and "end" in absolute terms.
They just appear as such even though the underlying reality is that of
Cosmic transfiguration.  Just how carbon and water are out there in our
planet as seemingly lifeless elements, yet also are constituents of our
very being.  The human body is made from the same "star dust" as the
rest of the world around us.  What makes us different from, say, a dog
and a tree is the specific combinations of elements, the systems of
systems those produce, and the emergent phenomena derived therefrom.

So while we perceive of our human existence in linear terms, we already
understand that nothing in the universe is coming from nothing and moves
towards nothing.  Birth is not the creation of life and death cannot be
its end.  These are but instances in a continuum where forms of life
manifest and reform anew.  Life is immanent: it is everywhere, to the
point that all is life.  Everything has Logos built-in: rate, ratio,
reason, cause, language.  Everything!

What transfiguration means is that nothing is ever lost and nothing is
ever created from zero.

With those granted, let me answer your questions:

> Prot , What happend to previously dead people our grandfathers,
> forefathers?
>
> - Where are they ?
>
> - Where are all the billions of dead peoples our forefathers?

In the immediate sense, they persist through us.  Their genes form part
of our genes.  This, however, does not imply that they are us and that
we are them.  A part of them is present in incarnate form.  Same
principle for instincts, talents, character traits: they practically are
codified experiences and/or underlying patterns of feedback loops passed
on from one generation to the next (a feedback loop entails language).

This brings me to the point of what exactly is the human organism.  Is
it a constant or a variable?  Is it monolith-like or a composite?
Consider the concept of resurrection.  You die and somehow are brought
back to your human form.  The body is restored and everything works the
way it did.  Which instance of the body?  And what is "the body",
anyway?  We consist of systems of systems.  These have cells which
subsist in a cycle of their own, while we also are the host of benign
microorganisms whose presence is necessary for our existence (we have a
symbiotic relationship with them).  Because the cells and the
microorganisms have shorter spans of transfiguration than we do, we have
to conclude that the human organism is a variable: it is always
changing.  This organism that understands itself as "Protesilaos" is
akin to a city where people come and go: the city lives on through the
centuries, while each individual person does not.  If we believe that
the human organism exists as such, and not as a mere collection of its
subsystems, then the city must also exist in the same way.

What does this say about individuality?  That the point of no further
division (individual==non-divisible (also see "atom" in its original
sense, not the misnomer of physics)) is a matter of expedience: it has
its utility in our everyday affairs, but is otherwise not representative
of an indelible line separating scopes of application in the world.  The
perception of selfhood must thus be conceived as a continuum of
increments, couched in terms of our variability.  To resurrect someone
is to pick an arbitrary instance of their self.

Is this all?  Or is the human organism a system of systems that operates
within a wider system of systems?  Put differently, is a human
self-contained, having a standalone presence?  Or is it part of a
greater whole?  I will answer by way of an example.  Right now there is
a lot of dust in the atmosphere where I live.  It makes it difficult to
perform certain tasks, such as go hiking.  It also affects my overall
ability to write, as it makes me feel more tired than usual.  This means
that the "Protesilaos" with the extra dust in the air differs from the
one without the extra dust, ceteris paribus.  The weather defines my
existence.  And we can extend this to the very prerequisites for human
sustenance, but you get the idea.  The point is that in order to
resurrect a given instance of a human, it is necessary to also recreate
the conditions which framed and ultimately brought about said instance
of human.  If we extend this for ever-greater supersystems, we have to
conclude that the resurrection of one instance requires the recreation
of the entire universe, else the chain of dependencies will not be
satisfied recursively.

In this regard, no set of factors, no concatenation of events, is ever
exactly the same as before.  Different loops of transfiguration entail
incessant differentiation.

Which brings me back to your question: our forebears cannot persist as
constants.  Whatever remains of them is subject to differentiation.  And
whatever appears to be lost, is transfigured into new forms of being.

> - I was shocked . There is group of real scientist, doctors ,
> psychologist , researching after life, when they found most of patient
> usually children who give details , family secret, names, of people or
> place they never heard, never gone to. what do you think what is this
> prot?

I will not comment on the findings of a research programme whose details
I do not know and whose technicalities lie outside my area of expertise.
A philosopher in their capacity qua philosopher can only connect the
dots and trust in scientists to do their part in earnest.

Taking your claim at face value, this is not surprising.  Our body comes
with knowledge that we never learnt through direct experience, let alone
a formal setting.  The lungs knows how to breath and filter air.  The
heart knows how to beat and send blood to the rest of the system.  The
brain knows how to discern patterns and parse or guess their meaning.
Muscles have a memory of their own.  Our mitochondria are mini power
plants that know how to convert energy that is ultimately useful for the
human organism as a whole.  And so on.

If some knowledge is inheritable and/or built-in and assuming we cannot
identify a robust terminus, it follows that "some more knowledge" can
also be passed on to next generations.  Whether it can be retrieved,
decoded, and rendered lucid is another discussion.

Ultimately though, this reminds me of a tenuous dichotomy we have
between the genetic and epigenetic magnitudes: nature versus nurture.  I
understand them as analytical constructs, which means that they only
have a standalone presence conceptually, not in their actuality.  In
truth, there is no "human nature" in abstract, in some pristine
condition that we may study _in vitro_.  What we can only ever study is
the human _in vivo_ and this necessarily involves experiences of all
sorts: in short, it encompasses what would qualify as "nurture".

> If there is like say after life, where are billions of people who
> died? or new who are new born? as population is increasing .

If the afterlife is taken literally, then we already have that: it is
called "life".  Life is immanent and everlasting.  There is nothing
before and nothing after it.  The universe is alive.  Life is
ever-present.  If, however, the afterlife is supposed to be a place
where humans continue to exist after they die as a faithful copy of
their self minus integral aspects of their selfhood, then I have some
serious doubts.

In cultures I am aware of, there is a deep-seated belief that a human
has a body and a soul.  These are thought of as two distinct magnitudes,
with the soul counting as the "real self".  The body is perishable,
while the soul is eternal.  To me, this contradicts the reality of the
human organism I elaborate on earlier.  If some dust can condition my
existence, and if all other factors from my subsystems to the
supersystems I am present in will inform, influence, frame, or otherwise
determine my actuality, how can there be an immutable self?  At its
best, an immutable kernel of selfhood is just that: a kernel, not the
whole thing.  Consequently, even if the soul exists, it does not have a
standalone presence and does not represent one's true self.

Transfiguration implies that nothing is ever truly created or truly
lost.  The notion of a soul as some transcendent magnitude makes perfect
sense _poetically_: it is easier to say that some kernel of selfhood
persists in the universe, than to explain that actually a pattern in a
structure of patterns (and systems of systems) may be reproduced---and
be discernible---in another structure.  While expressing myself with
metaphors and similes, I can claim that an aspect of some ancient
philosopher is present in me, made apparent through the inexorable
inclination to do philosophy.  Though such an ancient philosopher cannot
be me, due to what I explained about resurrection: to reproduce a given
instance of selfhood, the entire universe would have to be recreated in
its given configuration.

In conclusion, nothing is ever lost and nothing is ever made out of
nothing.  What remains is a facet of Logos, which is present in
everything: patterns of combinations, else language and reason, which
inform emerging systems of systems.  Everything persists as knowledge
and as a memory of its presence.  And everything is, in essence, a remix
of available information: a reconstitution of factors in sequences which
engender ever-changing states of affairs.  The idea that there is an
afterlife where humans continue to live as humans despite not having the
corporeal presence that defines them as human simply is a testament to
our anthropocentric biases.
