---
title: "Why do I write?"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal covering some philosophical themes about ownership."
---

The following is an excerpt from my journal.  The theme is
philosophical.  My journal is boring, yes.  It isn't filled with
pictures of pretty faces and romantic poetry.  I'm working on it.

* * *

I write thousands of words per day.  What I post on my website is the
tip of the iceberg.  While I have been publishing with regularity, I
never paused to reflect on the reasons this is happening.  Is what I am
doing necessary?  What is the point, anyway?

I don't think my writings are mine.  Ideas cannot be owned and we can
never draw a clear distinction between the conceptually endogenous and
exogenous in a cosmic continuum.  Every factor exists in a system of
factors.  Every phenomenon is couched in terms of other phenomena.
Everything unfolds as series of feedback loops.  To focus on a dot and
to declare it "truly mine" feels arbitrary.  It rests on the presumption
that the object has a standalone presence: it was created from nothing
and exists in nothing to the effect that it can be treated in isolation.
Nonsense!  There is always something.  What is "mine" came from
somewhere, intermixed with something, got filtered by another factor,
and continues to transfigure the way all presences in the cosmos do.

My writings don't belong to me for a more practical consideration as
well: I do not control what would conventionally be described as "my
creativity".  Yesterday, for example, I was tired and wanted to take a
nap.  Instead of falling asleep I got an idea to write an article which
ended up being more than 2000-words-long---the second of that day, mind
you.  There goes my rest!  Superficially, I have a choice: I can, say,
go out for a walk instead of typing characters on the computer.  Though
the driving force behind my writing is not a matter of my volition, for
I am practically compelled into action.  I can try to run from it, but I
do eventually need to get to my bed, at which point it will find me and
make me to do its bidding.

This entry is a case in point.  I went to sleep, closed my eyes, and
then "why do I write?" popped up...  Now I am no longer feeling sleepy
and must serve this impersonal agency---my creativity---that makes me do
stuff.

I think I am content with what I am doing.  It is fascinating to
elucidate all those concepts and to draw linkages between old and new
ideas.  My mind stays sharp and my health is excellent.  All good,
right?  I am inclined to answer affirmatively, but the fact I am not in
charge gives me second thoughts (non-control would apply to those too).
What if my liking of this state of affairs is but a rationalisation?
What if it is a coping mechanism to distract me from the reality of my
powerlessness?  What if my presumed agency is but an illusion and I
simply am an automaton that reacts to complex chains of causality?  What
is agency, anyway, if not the impression of control?  "My" agency, "my"
ideas, "my" life...  Who is even the owner in such a relationship?  Take
life, for instance: I had no choice in it and there is no "I" which
exists independently of "its" life.

I write out of necessity.  The answer to the titular question is the
same as the one for "why do I breath?".  I cannot do otherwise.  Will
this last forever?  I have no idea.  One day "my" creativity will stop
controlling me and I will never publish a single word again.  If I
disappear, it is not because I had any such intention.  It just left me
alone.

I can come up with self-congratulating explanations such as that I write
out of a desire to help others.  After all, I am the greatest do-gooder
ever.  Sure!  That narrative would give me a few inane points.  Perhaps
someone would flatter me and my ego would be satiated for the day.
Alternatively, I can be overly dramatic by formulating some story that
conforms with the tired trope of the struggling genius.  Perhaps I am
distracting myself from the ugliness of my life.  This would also serve
the purpose of bringing attention to myself.  More points for my
meaningless high score!  The ego loves that sort of thing.  Would I be
honest, though?  Would I be admitting to what is actually happening or
would I be pretending that I am the prime mover and ultimate arbiter of
whatever feedback loops and processes contribute to this state of
affairs?  Even if I were driven to support others or was running away
from my misery, the motivation would still not be "mine".

The illusory state is all we have.  My musings here involve the
contradiction of using "my" reason to argue against it.  It is a fool's
errand.  Though we cannot do otherwise.  Even if this is all a
phantasmagoric show of epiphenomena, we are still caught in it.  The
human condition imposes as much.  Again, not a choice.  There is no
opt-out mechanism from this chain of impressions.  I thus cannot avoid
entertaining the thought that I am actually being reasonable now, that
this text makes sense and that its contents have a deeper meaning.  When
I state that I do not own ideas, I am already expressing this as _my
idea_.  It is conceived and stated as such.

We thus operate at a certain level of abstraction where we take some
magnitudes for granted.  It is how we identify with extensions of our
being.  My ideas, my fears, my desires...  Though we sometimes realise
that the interplay of factors contributing to our actuality is far
greater than whatever capacity of initiative we think we have.  Perhaps
my illusory state just tricks me into believing that I do not own
anything when, in fact, I do.  Though if it can deceive me, it might be
doing it consistently.

I can only write about philosophy and explain this or that concept.  And
we can all act in accordance with those or other precepts, all driven by
the belief we are controlling our condition.  To what end?  Does being a
philosopher give me anything?  Does any role or preoccupation bestow
upon us something we may then own?

Here I am, sleepless, writing these words as I have no other option.  No
worries though.  I will explain it away as a moral duty or, perhaps,
some awkward attempt at impressing one of those pretty faces.  I can
come up with justifications that seem plausible.  And you will believe
me, and congratulate me, and we shall continue to dance.

"Protesilaos, you write so much!"  Now they know.
