---
title: "Re: what gender pronoun do you use?"
excerpt: "My answer to my preferred gender pronoun and what I think about the broader topic."
---

I received the titular question.  There is nothing substantive to quote
from the rest of the message.  Below is my reply.

* * *

To your question: I don't specify a pronoun.  You are welcome to use
whatever works for you: he, she, ze, they, etc.

Now allow me to elaborate at some length in order to (i) avoid
misunderstandings and (ii) state my opinion on the broader topic.

I think individual self-determination is of paramount importance.  It is
a matter of expressing oneself in freedom (e.g. without fear) but also
of living in dignity.  This extends to how people like to be named.  For
example, someone called "Katerina" will feel besieged if people keep
addressing them as "Kat" against their will.  Such is a case of
bullying, harassment, and, ultimately, dehumanisation.

To this end, pronouns are not a separate category.  We treat them as
part of the general issue of self-determination, freedom of expression,
and dignity.  This does not trivialise them: on the contrary, it couches
them in terms of their significance in a legal-institutional order that
recognises human liberty and safeguards fundamental rights.

There is this notion in certain ultra-conservative circles that the
choice of pronoun is an extreme leftist stratagem whose ulterior end is
malevolent.  In such cases, "leftism" is a caricature of some prevalent
"cultural Marxism" or equivalent bugaboo that is supposed to be
prevalent in all centres of power, which is ostensibly promoted by
genuinely crazy folks who work laboriously for the annihilation of all
values.  There is no nuance involved, no sincerity in addressing the
actual points of the argument.  "Leftism" in this context is all about
using hyperbole in pursuit of creating fear and polarising proponents.
Whereas I think we need to remain calm and avoid demonising the other
sides to the debate.  Picking a pronoun is an extension of human rights.
If you (the general "you", not you in particular) believe human rights
are some insane leftist conspiracy, may the gods of this world bless
your soul.

With those granted, I must clarify why I personally do not have a
preferred pronoun.  To me, it does not matter what others think about my
personhood.  It has no impact in how I perceive myself.  For as long as
there is no bullying involved, I am indifferent to whether others think
I am a man or not and what kind of concepts are fastening upon those
constructs.

Some further reading on my website, in case you have not checked it out
already:

+ [Thoughts on masculinity](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2022-06-20-thoughts-masculinity/)
+ [On relationships, expectations, and dehumanisation](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2022-04-06-relationships-expectations-dehumanisation/)

I do care about oppression though.  If anyone wants to force me to
conform with their associations of what constitutes man, non-man, and
the like, then I will defend myself and send them all to hell.

To be clear: this makes me an ally of the LGBT+ cause, though I do not
identify as a member or non-member.  In terms of liberty, I broadly
agree with this movement for the reason I already explained about human
rights and concomitant freedoms.  What I personally do not encourage and
endorse about certain narratives in the LGBT+ community is the fact that
they remain trapped in the representations of the oversexualised
cultural milieu they spring from or are juxtaposed with.

In a traditional society, people were divided on whether they had a
penis or vagina.  _"You have this, therefore you must be that and the
other."_  Such was the thinking, with an emphasis on the normative
claims: the "must be" part.  With LGBT+, we escape from the narrow
confines of this binary, which is a step in the right direction.  Though
we are still prompted to define ourselves in terms of our sexuality; we
continue to elevate sex and sexual preferences as the single most
important factor in one's selfhood.  To my mind, this goes from the old
way of having two boxes to put people in, to the new modus operandi of
creating a few more boxes, all centred around how genitalia are---or
should be---used.  Better than nothing, though I want to see more.

What I prefer to do is to appreciate people on the basis of their innate
qualities, talents, hobbies, interests.  Do they enjoy art?  Are they
thoughtful fellows with whom I can hold a rewarding conversation?  Do
they have a sense of humour?  Are they nice to strangers?  This sort of
thing.  Notice how none of that is about what they do or don't do in
their bed, who they love and with which modalities, et cetera.  I don't
mind if one is sexual in a given manner or asexual, romantic or
aromantic, and all permutations in-between.  Show me the real person,
the fully fledged human being that is necessarily not just a function of
sex.

By "fully fledged" I mean that we are not limited to carnal needs or
desires.  We have emotions and reason, and we can connect with the
cosmos with what is typically known as "spirituality" (let's take that
word at face value for now, though do read more about my philosophy, if
you haven't done it already).

To me, what matters is that we find the other fellow travellers in our
life.  Those who have a sense of wonder about the world; who remain
dubitative and inquisitive on what the cosmos has to offer; who are not
burdened by social expectations and peer pressure regarding all those
normativities about love, work, social standing, and the like; who want
to live this short life we have without fear and without pretences.

So yes, call me whatever pronoun works for you.  And, please, remain
tolerant of diversity: do not commit the hubris of purporting to know
the truth---you don't.  At its core, pluralism and respect for
subjectivity is underpinned by a disposition of honesty, of admitting
that we are not omniscient and have not figured out everything.  Let
there be room for doubt, for creativity, and for experimentation.
