---
title: "About the world as simulation"
excerpt: "Comment on this notion that the world may be a simulation."
---

I received the following via email in response to my presentation about
[Cosmos, Logos, and the living
universe](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-05-cosmos-logos-living-universe/)
(2022-02-05).  I am sharing my reply with permission, while not
revealing the identity of my correspondent:

> Thanks for sharing your thoughts about the Cosmos. [...] Have you
> heard about the theory that the universe may be a simulation?  How
> would that affect your ideas?

I am aware of this notion, though I have not read any particular
"theory".  My opinion is thus limited by my understanding of what the
core claim is: we have no means of knowing whether the universe is real
as we are a part of it and so whatever means we have are framed by the
universe's actuality.

In short: I agree.  Does this affect my ideas though?  No.  It does not
change my views about the universe, as it still has immanent logos, it
still is ever-present (in its self-contained way if we entertain the
simulation theory), it still has no true life and death or creation and
destruction as everything is in the process of transfiguration.  What I
believe to be the case about the Cosmos applies to this ostensibly or
potentially simulated universe.

Though I hold the same views for the plane of reality where the
simulation takes place.  If that too is simulated, then for the one
superordinate to it, and so on.  There has to be some point where no
prior simulation takes place.  In that world we will still have immanent
logos and everything else I have talked about.  Why?  Because we already
know that this originary plane of reality has structure, order, pattern,
and hence reason and language.  The idea of running a simulation cannot
even be conceived in a state of absolute Chaos; "chaos" being the
absolute non-Logos.  We cannot even think about Chaos but only describe
it in terms of negation as it being the opposite of what we can
conceive: Logos.  Same principle for nothingness or non-Being.  It is
impossible to describe chaos or nothingness because the very
description---the very thought process---is Logos.

Consequently, my views are not limited to the observable world but to
all possible worlds a human may reason about.

Since we are here, let me connect something I have said before with this
simulation theory.  It is about the notion of "revelation" and
specifically my view that some exalted being cannot truly reveal itself
to us.

Suppose the one who runs the simulation appears in front of you and
tells you about their identity.  Let's call this being the "simulation
master".  You ask for proof and the simulation master performs all sorts
of acts that you interpret as miracles.  To your eyes, this being
clearly is superior to anything you have seen before or anything
humankind knows about.  Still, no miracle can ever prove the simulation
master's claim about their identity, because we can only prove that
which is within our means of comprehension.  We lack the capacity to
verify whether this world is a simulation or not because we cannot think
beyond what the universe renders possible.  There is a terminus.  By the
same token, we lack the power to comprehend that which is supposed to be
greater than the limits of our comprehension.  As such, we can only
provide assent to the simulation master's claims by performing a leap of
faith: we know the apparent miracles are beyond our abilities and we
infer that this being must be who they claim to be.

Hopefully this makes sense.  The point is that if we are honest with
ourselves, we will have to remain sceptical even in the face of the
simulation master: that is what our condition renders possible.  I think
you can discern the implications.
