---
title: "Re: books on Greek mythology?"
excerpt: "My answer to a general question about how to approach Greek mythology and ancient sources."
---

I got the question in the title.  My answer is copied below.

* * *

Sorry, I have no books to recommend and am not the foremost expert on
the subject.  I guess you already have an idea of who Homer is, so start
with the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_.  You will be left with lots of
questions and those will lead you to more sources.  For a wiki of sorts,
check: <https://www.theoi.com/>.

I searched for a video to help you get started.  There is a lot of
sensationalised rubbish out there.  Though I think this one does a
decent job at presenting the bigger picture:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dCaDjvcaWpo>.  The video does not go
into details and makes several references that you will not be able to
connect to, but it should still give you a idea of what the matter is.

What follows are some general thoughts on Greek mythology and
polytheism.

## The significance of locality

There is no such thing as a singular corpus that is known as "Greek
mythology" or "Greek religion".  This is partially a scholarly construct
based on similarities that existed between otherwise localised
traditions and cults.

The ancient peoples were divided into small states, typically
city-states.  Each had its own customs, specific cultural events, and
deities.

For example, Athens was protected by Athena: the goddess of wisdom, but
also of strategy and reasonableness even at war.  The famous Parthenon
at the Acropolis is a temple dedicated to this goddess, while the word
"parthenon" roughly translates to "virginium" because Athena is
described as the ever-virgin (I don't think this is a helpful metaphor
for understanding wisdom, but whatever).  By contrast, Sparta was all
about Apollon.

This is why we have multiple origin stories about the gods: each
locality would add its own interpretation and draw its own inferences
therefrom.  There wasn't a centralised authority to impose an orthodoxy.
The very notion of a "true belief", of heterodoxy and heresy, was
inconsistent with the political and cultural actuality of that world: a
world of localism and, thus, a world of diversity.

To me, what we call "ancient Greece", which is that mosaic of
city-states each with their own traditions, begins to end with
Alexander.  He ushered in imperialism, whose homogenising gigantism and
innate opposition to localism persisted through early Rome, the Eastern
Roman Empire (aka "Byzantine"), the Ottomans, onto the modern
protectorate of Western imperialism known as the "Hellenic Republic".

But I digress...  The point is that the peculiar brand of polytheism is
part of the political reality of the time.  With globalising religions
comes globalising authority, and vice versa.

## There is no generic good VS bad trope

Let's take the Iliad as a case point.  The epic starts in the middle of
the story with a fight between two of the major characters: Achilles and
Agamemnon.  They are petty and shameless men who bicker over who gets to
own a certain concubine.  There is nothing noble about it, nothing to be
proud of, nothing "heroic" in the sense we apply that term today.

The audience is not invited to identify with the protagonists and to
imagine how they too can emulate the impeccable character they depict.
No!  Myths tell the story of fundamentally flawed humans, whose
frailties of character bring about their eventual ruin.  Achilles and
Agamemnon are not role models: they are examples to be avoided, albeit
nuanced and complex.

Further into the narrative, Achilles, a peerless warrior, reigns supreme
over the leader of the opposing camp (Hector).  Instead of leaving after
he had won the battle, he decides to parade the dead body of his
opponent by dragging it along the ground on his chariot: an act of
cockiness that soon after led to the death of Achilles.

Agamemnon who, on paper was on the victor's side of the Trojan War, did
not find any glory and greatness in victory.  Upon his return home, he
was assassinated by his wife, because she could [rightly] not forgive
him for sacrificing their daughter at the start of the campaign
(Iphigenia).

[ Some stories have Iphigenia killed, others saved at the last minute. ]

There is nothing to respect about this.  A father who sacrifices his
daughter in his mad pursuit for power and glory.  What we learn from
this is that war brings the worst out of humans, as does greed and the
general mindlessness with which we try to accomplish inane goals.

## Hubris and the philosophy of moderation

The gruesome stories of ancient Greek culture are not about ancient
Greece per se: they apply to the human condition in general.  Do we need
to look any further than World War II to discern humanity's capacity for
inhumanity?

Greek mythology does not beautify the human condition.  It shows its
failings in an attempt to add artistic flair to the core lesson of not
going to the extremes.

We learn about humans who lost sense of perspective, who overestimated
their abilities or who did not recognise the limits imposed up them by
the given situation, and who suffered the consequences of their lack of
wisdom and restraint.

[ Relevant commentary with links to more publications: [Re: Hey prot,
Why greek gods are represented as
naked?](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2022-06-09-re-greek-gods-naked/)
]

The word for going to the extremes is "hubris", which is loosely
translated as "insolence" and is presented as that brand of cockiness
which pushes the human past their boundaries.

We do not need mythology to understand hubris.  Just think about
ordinary life:

* There is an ongoing pandemic yet your friend takes no safety
  precautions whatsoever because "it's just a common cold".  This person
  does not understand the gravity of the situation, while such
  recklessness can only lead to further trouble.

* Someone is driving a motorcycle down the highway at full speed without
  wearing a helmet and protective vest.  They do not admit to the the
  limits imposed by the human body and how their actions can affect
  others.

* The government is deforesting large sections of land which then sells
  to boost "foreign direct investment".  The planet is being destroyed,
  but authorities will blithely boast about economic growth.

We can easily identify examples of hubris all around us.  The key
lesson, then, is not whether, say, Iphigenia dies or lives but how far
are people willing to go and what they are prepared to instrumentalise
in pursuit of their goals.  We must question the propriety of those
ends.

* Was it worth it for Agamemnon to fight a pointless war and win it?
  No.  And the artist answers thus by having him killed by his own wife
  as retribution for his vanity.

* What is your pandemic-denying friend trying to prove?  That they are
  immune to disease?  Bullshit!  That they are smarter than you?
  Nonsense!  Whatever the goal, it is ultimately not worth it being
  careless.

* Is the motorcyclist achieving anything by driving like crazy?  Are we
  supposed to marvel at their bravery?  No.  We just wait for their
  inevitable death and, possibly, the killing of others as collateral
  damage.

* Does the destruction of the planet do anything good for our
  longer-term outlook?  Well, I hope we all know the answer.

## Understand before you pass judgement

It is easy for us modern folks to misinterpret ancient sources and
project our values onto them.  Our culture is different, meaning that we
do not have the same sensitivities as they did.

Though the greatest error is to focus too much on the details and fail
to appreciate the general point.  Myths remain relevant insofar as they
tell us something about the human condition (they are also useful for
historians and related experts, but that is not what we are discussing
here).

So yeah, good luck researching this topic further.  Feel welcome to
share any findings.  I, too, am interested to learn more about the
subject.
