---
title: "On hubris and not tolerating abuse"
excerpt: "My opinion on what hubris is and why we should not tolerate abusive behaviours."
---

The following is extracted from a recent exchange I had.  The identity
of my correspondent remains private.

* * *

> [Prot edit: I am rewording it to be generic] They verbally attacked
> me.  I felt pressured and uncomfortable, but didn't say anything.  I
> let it pass.  They are a nice person.  These things happen.

I see.  Allow me to expound on the general topic here.  I will be
addressing you, but please do not take it personally.  I only am aware
of the fragmentary information you have provided and thus cannot opine
on the specifics.  Whether what I am about to write applies to your case
is for you to decide---I don't need to know the details.

We tend to have a sense of duty towards people who are close to us:
friends, family, a significant other.  We feel obliged to stick by their
side and are prepared to sacrifice at least part of our comfort to
accommodate them.  Normally, this is a noble disposition: it is what
allows us to overcome our egocentrism and connect with others at a
deeper level.  However, life teaches us that there is no such thing as a
pure good or pure evil _in vivo_.  When something virtuous is done in
excess it reaches a point where it becomes vicious.  A couple of
analogies:

* We need water to sustain ourselves.  Water is life.  Water is good.
  If you drink oodles of it, such as, say, 20 litres per day, it drains
  you of nutrients: it no longer is beneficial to you.

* The difference between poison and remedy is one of degree.  A pill can
  address an ache and cure a disease.  A bottle of pills will kill you.

The ancients thus advised a life of moderation.  Avoid the extremes.
Don't do things in exaggeration.  Have a sense of what the balance is.
In ancient Greece, these teachings were embedded in artistic
representations where the gods would set the limits and humans who would
transgress them would be met with odious consequences.  The "gods" here
are not beings who micromanage our life and are in the lookout ready to
punish us for every misdeed.  No!  They are the artist's---the culture's
more broadly---way of saying in simple and memorable terms that, as a
matter of fact, we operate within context-dependent boundaries and that
if we fail to recognise them we will be in trouble.

The Greek word for this kind of reckless behaviour where we go past the
limits is "hubris".  We do not need to have a theistic conception of it.
We just have to focus on the substantive point, which we observe
everywhere in life.

Duty towards others is or can be a virtue.  This is a matter of degree:
a function of the specifics.  Whenever we {over,under}estimate our
capacities and/or fail to discern the prevailing conditions that inform
our environment, we run the risk of committing hubris.  Which means that
we will eventually have to face the consequences of our actions,
negligence, cockiness, and the like.

In concrete terms, you describe what seems like an isolated event and
you dismiss it as a trivial incident.  Are you being honest with
yourself?  Is this really a one-off act that came out of nowhere?  It
has no precedent and there is no chance it will happen again?  What
about related acts?  Are there other abusive tendencies in effect;
tendencies that you prefer to ignore by also rationalising them as
trivial?

I don't expect answers and am not interrogating you.  Those are for you
to consider in your inner dialogue.

Our duty towards others often manifests as overconfidence in our ability
to endure misconduct.  We think that we are tough and we can take it.
Why do we believe so?  Because we want to tell ourselves how resilient
we are in order to remain faithful towards those people.  Put
differently, our sense of responsibility clouds our judgement.

What does "clouds our judgement" entail?  That we do not remain open to
the truth.  Even if there are warning signs we assume them as
irrelevant.  Be it consciously or not, we do not understand the
_constitution of the case_---the applicable factors in their
interplay---and thus have a false representation of what the situation
is.  Put metaphorically, we will not admit that we are on a collision
course with the iceberg in the horizon.  Ever heard of the Titanic?  Is
that not hubris writ large?

Notice how I am writing about themes of overconfidence, of downplaying
the significance of certain patterns, and of not admitting (or not
willing to admit) the truth.  I am hinting at the potential of hubris; a
potential we all have.

To press on with the notion of overestimating our endurance.  You
mentioned how the abusive incident is nothing to worry about.  (So why
are you even thinking about it and sharing it with me? Are you honest
with yourself?)  Basically, you expressed the feeling that you are tough
enough and will not succumb to such otherwise minor wounds.  Let me then
remind you of the notion of "death by a thousand cuts".  I do not mean
this literally, but employ it as a schematic way of arguing that your
methodology is wrong.  You are treating the event in isolation and if
there is a second occurrence of it, you will still interpret is in its
own right, and so on.  What your method obscures, what you are not
seeing, is the possible pattern of abuse.  If you focus too much on the
moment, you only ever notice the single cut.  Take the time to reflect
on the concatenation of phenomena and you may discover that the one cut
is part of the thousand.

This brings me to the point of ranking abusive behaviours.  Sure, not
all of them are equally egregious.  Damage can come in many forms and
vary in degrees.  There are abusive actions that injure you in major and
obvious ways and others that are more subtle: the kind of poison that is
administered with a gentle touch.  These differences matter for the
analyst (e.g. a judge or you acting in hindsight), though they mean
little for the patient of the actions.  When you are on the receiving
end of abuse, even a small dose is more than you would like.  To that
end, we should not fall into the trap of ranking mischief and accepting
minor offences against our person.

By rationalising abuse as inconsequential, by beautifying the injurious,
we inwardly corrupt our sense of duty towards others and turn it into a
form of bondage.  No shelter is impervious, no carapace is hard enough.
Stop misrepresenting an attack as innocuous.

No person is perfect.  We have emotions and may have trouble controlling
them.  Everyone is allowed a chance to redeem themselves and try once
again to do the right thing.  Yet nothing is unconditional.  We must
remain honest with ourselves and recognise the constitution of the case.
When certain patterns of behaviour are not reversed, we must forgo our
duty to the other person and accept that we also have a responsibility
of catering to our own wellness.

There is a reason why we have a sense of selfhood in addition to a sense
of togetherness: "the gods", to use the artist's medium, decided that we
must find a balance between those magnitudes.  When we work towards
either extreme, we commit hubris.

In conclusion, I used to think like you: that I am strong and that the
transgressions of others were trivial.  I learnt about my mistake the
hard way, i.e. by suffering the consequences.  I now know when enough is
enough and when "fuck off" is the right reply.  True strength lies in
the knowledge that your resources are finite---do not waster them.
Think about hubris very seriously: do not dismiss it as some ancient
superstition.
