---
title: "Why I do not use social media"
excerpt: "The potential for sociability on social media is held back by major constraints with how the medium works and what patterns of behaviour it engenders."
---

I used to maintain a social media presence in the early 2010s.  At the
time, I was under the impression that those platforms enhance existing
social relations while providing the impetus to the formation of new
ones.  I was wrong!

Let me start with an example that illustrates what was, in my
experience, the typical behaviour of a user on those platforms.  I
used to write articles about the politics of the European Union and
the then-unfolding financial crisis in the Euro Area.  One day I
published a long and nuanced essay, which I then blithely posted on
all my profiles for my network to read.  Not to accumulate Internet
points, mind you, but for them to be informed about what I had written
and, hopefully, to elicit some valuable response (I dislike clickbait
and low effort entries).  Within a few seconds I got "likes" and
positive comments, such as the generic "good read!", as well as a
repost with the caption "essential reading".

This was the norm and I was becoming unhappy.  Can anyone read a long
essay in a matter of seconds?  No.  Can they form an opinion about it
in such a brief period, let alone have the confidence to recommend it
to others?  No.

What those people were doing on a regular basis was to signal to their
friends/followers how knowledgeable and sophisticated they are or,
rather, purport to be.  They were basically bragging about having
discovered an analysis and/or possessing the requisite intellectuality
to show interest in that sort of material.

I never had a meaningful exchange on social media.  Not once did I
receive insightful commentary.  Opinions would oscillate between the
extremes of unrealistic praise and unfair dismissal.  For matters that
are more subtle, such a binary is untenable.  Those users may have
been real people, yet their behaviour was indistinguishable from that
of a bot that responds to basic triggers with formulaic remarks.

I do not blame the person, but the medium.  Those platforms are
designed in such a way as to keep the user scrolling through their
feed.  The more one scrolls, the higher the number of advertisements
they are exposed to.  Every other point of entry or interaction is
designed accordingly.  Notifications invite the user back to the app,
while engagement in short bursts reinforces the addiction to the
provider of the stimulus.

My friends' avatarised self on those platforms was being robotified.
However, the effect was not contained to the digital space as it was
spilling over to quotidian life.  There was a time when I would meet
people, sit at a table with them, and they would constantly check on
their phone.  While we were all collocated, each of us was actually
alone.  Sad!

What is the point?  Why go out with you if I am not with you in terms
of a joint presence?  Perhaps because I am a philosopher or just
sensitive and a romantic fool, I found this state of affairs
disturbing.  I was being alienated from a human world that was
becoming decisively less human.  Social media are not amplifying our
sociability.  These platforms are commodifying the superficial aspect
of being friendly, ultimately to usurp interpersonal relations and
unscrupulously monetise their new role as mediators to---and enablers
of---our exchanges.

Which brings me to the point of federated media, of the sort we find
in the GNU, Linux, Emacs milieux.  While there is no platformarch
(platform ruler) to abuse their power on a colossal scale or,
generally, a central authority to enforce conditions, the medium
remains inherently alienating.  Social media, federated or
centralised, condition the user to make low effort posts in order to
stay in that short-term loop of seeking validation and responding to
momentary stimuli.  The type of "good read" comment I alluded to above
is not engendered by the ruthless for-profit nature of the mainstream
platforms: humans do this all the time to show off and/or gain
attention (and platformarchs exploit it with impunity).  The medium
simply lowers the barrier, bringing the worst in us.  Hence the
toxicity or tempests in teapots.

It is not simply a matter of the quality of posts we find while using
the application.  Inconsiderate posting patterns have a cumulative
effect, which manifests in the externality of constant notifications.
To be active on social media is to invite all those low effort pings
throughout the day.  The more invested one becomes, the greater the
exposure.  As I seek the human element, blocking the notifications
runs counter to the very sociability I want.  Yet being distracted the
whole time is not helpful either.

In face-to-face exchanges we have the natural barrier of distance.
When we are close, we communicate in earnest and when we are apart we
do not interfere with each other's life.  Using a medium that comes
with the expectation of real-time feedback dismantles this barrier.
It is considered offensive or otherwise unsettling to read one's
message and not reply, leaving its visible status to "read".  While I
understand the reason, I find this unfortunate as it forces us to
muster the energy to be sociable on demand.  From whence comes the
inevitable hypocrisy, for no-one is available at all times.  This is
why I prefer email: there is mutual recognition that communications
are asynchronous.

Social media can lead to new friendships, though only as an exception
to the rule.  I cannot feel any attachment at the outset to some
`M-xEmacsNerd` or be flattered when I get the equivalent of the "good
read" comment.  If we do establish a modicum of sociability, it will
be via a prolonged exchange of substantive messages where the person
reveals at least part of their personality.  This exchange must
preferably culminate in approximations of face-to-face contact, such
as voice and video messages.  Otherwise we remain Internet strangers
to varying degrees, which is fine, provided we acknowledge it as such
and do not pretend that we are friends.

Having to deal with a barrage of notifications, the high
noise-to-signal ratio, and the overall superficiality of each
exchange, seems like a disproportionate cost to pay for the potential
of making a friend on those platforms.  My point is that sociability
is not the first thing we get there.

Considered holistically, I am content with my decision to withdraw
from social media.  I remain in control of my attention span and the
kind of information I expose myself to.  Besides, I have a personal
website, so anyone can check my "profile" to discover at least some of
the things I care about.  As for establishing friendships, my hope is
that email is enough as a first step.  We have the technology for
remote communications, including by means of audio and video.  We can
still have rewarding interactions and be social.  Just skip the
intermediary who is a bad influence on all of us.
