---
title: "On wisdom guiding the action"
excerpt: "Excerpt from an email exchange where I explain why wisdom should guide one's actions."
---

The following is an excerpt from an email exchange where I told the
other person, whose identity shall remain hidden, how they should
disinvest from their projects, commitments, desires, etc. in order to
keep a sense of perspective and not develop tunnel vision that
inevitably leads to calamity (e.g. read my [Why it is not
yours](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-01-16-why-not-yours/)
(2022-01-16)).

* * *

> To me, non-commitment is as important as Stoicism's dichotomy of
> control.  I can't thank you enough for helping me learn
> non-commitment, so that I can see and seize new opportunities!

I am happy this exchange has helped you.

There is an ancient Greek saying that people still use: "συν Αθηνά και
χείρα κίνει".  It translates as "with Athena (the goddess), move your
hand".  That loosely means that you still have to put in the work even
if the goddess is by your side.  I would phrase it in secular terms as
having an initial two-fold meaning:

1. Talent is worthless without the accompanying hard work and commitment
   (Athena on her own will not do anything).
2. You focus on putting in the work, with the understanding that a whole
   range of factors is determined by external forces (so even if you
   move your hand, Athena must be there to help make things happen).

Which brings us back to what we have already discussed: try to be the
best version of yourself.  Be happy with yourself for the sincere effort
you put in.  Say "I did the best I could and I am proud of that".  Never
blame yourself for variables you cannot control.  And never belittle
yourself when you know that you tried in earnest.

The only time to be self-critical is when Athena is by your side but you
are not moving your hand; when you have the talent but are wasting it;
when conditions are favourable yet you remain idle.  If you are in such
a position of wastefulness, don't rationalise it as you being
worthless---that would be the lazy way out or, rather, idleness doing
the talk.  Instead, analyse the situation and try to identify the
factors that contribute to your inertia.  Self-criticism is more like
putting cold water on your face to wake up: it is not an attack against
you.  When you harm yourself, you are no longer engaging in criticism:
you are being cruel and unfair.  That is a form of hubris, as I have
written in recent publications:

1. [Why I learnt to let
   go](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-09-20-why-i-learnt-to-let-go/)
   (2021-09-20).
2. [Why you should not
   worry](https://protesilaos.com/books/2021-12-23-why-not-worry/) (2021-12-23).
3. [Ataraxia, moderation, and mysticism
   [video]](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-16-ataraxia-moderation-mysticism/)
   (2022-02-16).

Which brings me to the final point of why I think the saying mentions
Athena in particular: the goddess of wisdom.  We often "move our hand"
for the wrong reason.  We act without thinking things through.  Perhaps
we try to achieve something that is socially desirable even though we
don't truly want it.  (I find that we role-play by default, unless we
take decisive measures to take the initiative---another topic I have
covered in recent publications.)  Or we are emotionally invested in an
unrealisable desire.  Or maybe we expend a disproportionate amount of
energy on some trivial task, when we should be aiming for a balanced
lifestyle instead.  There are many cases where we lack perspective;
where we do not have wisdom guiding our actions.  When wisdom is absent,
whenever we fail to look at the bigger picture, our actions are likely
to be misguided.  Even if they yield results, those will not be the ones
we truly need.  Like having your neighbours "respect you" for your fancy
car, while you are either dead inside because you turned yourself into a
robot of the capitalist order or failed to treat yourself as a fully
fledged human being... Whatever the specifics, we must find the measure
and avoid the excesses.  The hand must be guided by wisdom.
