---
title: "Re: What do you think about Peter Singer's animal rights movement?"
excerpt: "My thoughts on the politics and philosophy of veganism and animal rights."
---

I got the question in the title via an email.  Below is a copy of my
reply.

* * *

I do now know who Peter Singer is and what that movement stands for.  I
will thus remain generic in my answer and trust you to connect the dots.

I treat animal rights through two distinct lens: (i) politics, (ii)
philosophy.

Insofar as politics are concerned, I agree with the notion that animals
have rights and am an ally of veganism.  The established food industry
contributes to the destruction of the planet and causes suffering on a
monumental scale.  By reducing global meat consumption, we at least
minimise the damage.

There are other benefits to a deliberate plant-based diet which have
political implications, such as an overall more healthy lifestyle that
effectively reduces the strain on health services, thus diminishing the
relative power of big pharma, junk food industries, and the like.

Veganism, however, cannot escape from the all-too-familiar fate of
capitalist appropriation simply by virtue of its own lofty ideals.  It
too can become a lucrative industry that ultimately does more harm than
good.  To truly enact sustainable reform, we need to introduce
thoroughgoing changes in the three pillars of political-economic
organisation: production, consumption, and ownership.  The end-goal is a
concerted disinvestment, to abolish human imperialism over the planet,
and revert to a more honest and humble way of living.

Right now every industry revolves around the core idea of pursuing
year-on-year fiscal growth.  It all comes down to profits, which
inevitably introduces perverse incentives to do the egregious thing in
order to conform with the demands of investors.  Think about planned
obsolesce, for instance: it is an indirectly malevolent scheme to make
products perishable and thus boost their sales in regular intervals.
The cost is not accounted on the annual balance sheet, since it is
"hidden" as an externality that harms the planet's ecosystems long-term.

The collective madness of sacrificing everything to the altars of growth
is not just damaging "the environment" in some vague sense.  It also has
direct pernicious effects on human wellness.  Think about cutthroat
labour markets, the erosion of labour rights, so-called "austerity" that
governments impose on people which undermines social services,
"quantitative easing" (another euphemism) which channels oodles of de
facto free money to the coffers of the biggest actors in the financial
sector, and so on.  For example, you might be a sports fan and are into
association football (soccer).  Have you noticed how many games elite
players are asked to play nowadays?  The sheer number is astonishing,
but also the conditions under which they are expected to put their
longer-term health at risk to contribute to the team (i.e. business),
such as by playing through injury (you often hear veterans say that
their knees/ankles are knackered and they can barely walk/jog).

You might think that none of this pertains to veganism and I have run
off on a tangent.  After all, what is the connection between a
footballer's health, the rights of a labourer in some sweatshop, and the
food we eat?  They are all industries which are underpinned by the same
ruthless practices of profiteering.  You err lamentably if you only ever
see things in a vacuum.

Veganism will thus be inwardly corrupted if it remains limited to a
food-only, purpose-specific initiative that has nothing to say about the
magnitudes that define our world (not just veganism, by the way, but
let's stay on topic).  It will avoid the deadly embrace of capitalism
and succeed in its stated ends once it becomes part of a wider movement
that aspires for the abolition of capitalism and the prioritisation of
practical ethics of cooperation and sustainability over unbridled
material gain at every level of interpersonal relations.

To offer an example of an all-too-real scenario where veganism may,
perhaps unwittingly, undo the good outcomes it brings about.  You may
have heard how bee populations are in danger as their hives are
collapsing.  In my experience as a farmer in a remote mountainous
region, I have noticed that bees collect their food all-year-round and
store a part of it for the winter (honey is not produced for us).  In a
place where there are lots of different types of vegetation, bees can
find food all the time.  Lavender, for instance, blossoms in my parts at
around November-December, which is a great boost for bees before they
enter the harsh winter.  If, however, vast expanses of land have only
one type of plant, such as soy culture, bees will not find food reliably
and thus die (there are other reasons as well, specifically pesticides).
Monoculture, especially at the "economies of scale" that capitalism
engenders, is the longer-term bane of every plantation (in part because
it requires aggressive practices, such as pesticides).  Farming for
vegan customers is no exception.  We need polyculture which, again,
links back to the notion of reasoning about the core idea of animal
rights in light of the bigger picture.

This brings me to the philosophical part.  I already explained that I am
an ally of veganism, wish to bring about systemic change, and encourage
people to be considerate about their life choices (e.g. parts of what I
wrote in [Re: suggestions to stay
focused?](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2022-06-04-suggestions-focus/)).
I also am of the view that any system of morality becomes impossible to
conform with once totalised.  This includes animal rights and veganism.

If we generalise veganism as a view that basically argues not to eat
meat on the premise that animals are alive, then we must ask the hard
question of whether all forms of life are covered by this assertion.  Do
plants have a life of their own?  Or are they just raw material that
exists solely for our sustenance?  And what does it even mean for
something to be objectified as "raw material"?  I think plants are forms
of life.  They have societies of their own, engage in cooperation, and
deal with competition, among many others.  Taking it a step further, I
even hold that *everything* is alive on the grounds that life cannot
originate from nothing, exist in nothing, and move towards nothing (for
an introduction to my views: [Cosmos, Logos, and the living
universe](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-02-05-cosmos-logos-living-universe/)).

If everything is life, then the totalising morality of not eating
presences that are alive is impossible to conform with: we will only be
ethical if we die from starvation.  And why would our self-destruction
be moral---or more moral (whatever that means)---if we too have a life
akin to the animals and plants?  Why would our collective self-annulment
be better if we too end up suffering from it?

This is a nuanced point and I hesitate to press on with it.  I fear the
kind of backlash that does not understand fine points and what
philosophy is about.  To re-iterate: I am supporting the cause of
veganism and animal rights at-large, but I cannot afford to ignore the
fact that any totalising morality is untenable.

Does this mean that because we cannot have a perfect moral disposition
that we should go to the other extreme of "anything goes"?  No, we just
need to apply our principles in accordance with practical
reasonableness.  Stop virtue signalling and the kind of grandstanding
that accuses others of not living up to unrealistic standards.

A general remark about political action: if you wait for the perfect
ideology to reveal itself or some ideal moment where everything aligns
neatly, you will simply suffer the consequences of your inertia and
unreasonable expectations, as others will act and will impose conditions
upon your quotidian life, whether you like it or not.

Finally, I close with a comment on Christian theology, at least as it is
popularised in my part of the globe.  I once asked a monk whether dogs
go to heaven.  He answered negatively, as they "do not have a soul
**like ours**" (Prot edit: added "like ours"---its omission was mistake
which changes the meaning).  You may argue that this particular monk was
clueless, which may be true as theologians can come up with varying
interpretations, though it is indicative of a widespread belief in
anthropocentrism (human-centrism) or else the notion that humankind has
some special value or purpose in this world.  Human is, after all,
supposed to be created in the image and likeness of the Christian God
(which sounds quite the privilege if you ask me---in case it is not
obvious, I am not religious).  The Enlightenment, whose very name is a
euphemism writ large if taken holistically, also laboured under this
anthropocentrism though it framed it in secular terms.  We thus live in
a modern political reality, whose historicity is informed by those
traditions, where we need to fight against the view that only humans
matter.  To argue for ecology is to dethrone Human and dismantle the
concomitant imperium over nature, to ultimately bring back value systems
that ancient peoples upheld; systems which respected nature and did not
assign some special role to humankind in the grand scheme of things.

Will we have the perfect polity?  No.  Though that is no reason to
refrain from implementing what is good within the confines of practical
reason.  The ideal is our guide, not our enemy.  Some progress is better
than none.
