---
title: "Comments on the apology of Socrates"
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange where I comment on Socrates and his views in the Apology."
---

What follows is an excerpt from a private exchange about this modern
translation of the apology of Socrates:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=id0Kkq4VHDo>.  I am sharing this with
the express permission of my correspondent, without disclosing their
identity.  The quoted/indented text is from my correspondent.

* * *

> But I wonder to what extent Socrates was a smart fool and to what
> extent he was right about his contemporaries.

I think it is hard to figure out the extent, because it is a matter of
degree on something we don't have enough data about.  What we know of
Socrates and of the day-to-day conditions back then is limited to what
has survived through the aeons.

The image we have of Socrates is one that is coloured positively by
his disciples (e.g. Plato) or is distilled to a "purity of form" by
the available evidence, where the real person is largely unknown and
we only get "the philosopher".  To put it differently, do we know if
Socrates was a funny person?  Did he have lots of friends?  Was he a
good father and did he help with house chores?  These may seem like
trivial issues when we are concerned with "the philosopher" but they
matter greatly in better understanding the actual human being.

It could be that Socrates was a brilliant thinker but had an awkward
way of expressing his ideas, such that others would not feel
comfortable around him.  We know many people today who can be highly
competent in their field but are not necessarily the best with social
skills.  This is fine.  The point is that knowing about this kind of
detail allows us to have a more realistic understanding of the person,
rather than the hagiographic representation we get from Plato.

Based on what I have read, I think Socrates was not a fool in his
method and outlook.  He may have been wrong in the way he said things
or, generally, how he conducted himself.  I think absolute commitment
to the truth, for example, is a sign of foolishness, not wisdom.

Why should the truth be the highest value unconditionally?  To me this
evaluation feels arbitrary.

Consider a thought experiment where the bullies are patrolling the
area and are asking you where their victim is.  Suppose that you know
the answer.  Do you speak the truth, thereby contributing to the harm
of a person, or do you lie in the hope of protecting the victim?
Again, why should the truth be the highest value unconditionally?  I
see no good reason for that.

And here is where I think Socrates is fundamentally mistaken.  He
believed in his principle so much that he failed to recognise that in
the human world we cannot apply absolutes the way we can in thought
experiments.

This does not mean that Socrates was wrong in his critiques.  We all
know how politicians pretend to be all-knowing.  The same kind of
shallow yet loud person we find today in politics, also existed in
ancient Athens.  But calling them out as fools, or insulting them
indirectly by attacking their fragile ego in front of their peers,
does not make you wise by comparison.

I can imagine why someone may get annoyed by a Socrates figure who
champions his self-righteousness (the "social gadfly").  Who appointed
this person to the role of the gadfly?  He claims the gods did, but do
we have any proof?  And what if he is just imagining things?  These
and related questions connect to the point I raised earlier about not
knowing enough about the day-to-day realities.

> Can the same pattern be seen in people today? How does somebody who
> wants to follow the way of the truth end up like Socrates?

The way of the truth is multifaceted.  Do we want to know the truth
about "why" we are here, for example?  This can make us research
cosmic magnitudes without ever paying attention to politics.  By the
same token, the way of the truth may be all about being a social
critic, though this comes with the implicit admission that the social
critic's critic is society at-large.  Which then raises the question
of who is "more" correct in the face of our limited knowledge.

> How do you balance your approach? You can not compromise the truth,
> but did Socrates go too far too early? to what extent trying to
> please Meletus of today and avoid Socrates' fate could be a trap?

In the Apology, Meletus is the caricature of an unreasonable fellow.
If the jury could be convinced by such feeble arguments, then
incompetence was running rampant in Athens.

At any rate, each case comes with its specific requirements.  There
are times where one can challenge authority and speak the truth,
though there are others where the truth is not the highest value.
(This assumes we know for sure what the truth is.)

Based on what we have, Socrates was uncompromising in his personal
mission.  Did others have persuasive arguments against him, but Plato
omitted or downplayed them in his biased view of events?  Or was
Socrates truly the only person around to always get it right?

I think pleasing people in places of power is generally a sign that
the person cares about influence, prestige, status, and the like.
Unless there is some compelling reason to prioritise those in pursuit
of a greater end, they are the sort of traps you are asking about.

Still, this does not mean that we only ever have a choice between
servitude or death.  It may be that we can choose another course of
action that is somewhere in between those extremes.  When we choose a
principled course of action, we have to ask if we are doing it in
accordance with practical reason.  And when we are in doubt, we should
refrain from going to great lengths for our ideas, because we may be
mistaken.
