---
title: "Comment on Jordan Peterson's EP 291 about “How to combat Hedonism”"
excerpt: "Excerpt from an exchange of views where I discuss some of the ideas that Jordan Peterson talked about together with Peter Kreeft."
---

What follows is an excerpt from a private exchange.  I am reproducing
it with permission, without disclosing the identity of my
correspondent.  This is a follow-up to a video presentation I did
yesterday "on hedonism and presence":
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2023-01-09-hedonism-presence/>.

* * *

> This discussion about hedonism appeared on my youtube, I wonder if
> the AI noticed me watching your video:
>
> <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKa8X5vjtjc>
>
> I do not agree with everything they say, but some statements touch upon
> similar issues to those you mentioned in your video.
>
> A few sentences add something interesting to what you said and clarify your
> concepts.
>
> But tell me, after watching that video are you more enlightened or more
> confused?

Thank you for sharing this!  Below are my thoughts about it.  Can I
publish this on my website and include your quote as well (together with
the link)?  I will not disclose your contact details.

Let me start with an admission that is relevant to this video: I tried
to read Nietzsche's "god is dead" opus many years ago but I quit.  I
did not like the style of exposition as I could not tell with
certainty what should be taken literally, what is hyperbole, what is a
metaphor...  Sure, it is sensational and captures the imagination,
though I am concerned that instead of understanding the author's
intent I will simply find an authority to justify my biases.

If I am to make up my own mind about what the author wrote, I might as
well do it without the author and be safe in the knowledge that
whatever mistake is mine as there is no authoritative source
supporting it.  I felt that Nietzsche was more interested to show off
his undeniable intelligence and ability to write than to make a clear
point.  I understand this is superficial as I never read further, so
take it for what it is.

Another general comment is that there are many interesting ideas in
this discussion, many of which I have also covered in my publications,
though it is hard to share my views on each of them because they are
not considered in depth.  I am concerned that if I expound on some
aside, I am likely assuming too many things and am not treating the
opinion fairly.  For example, there is this comment about what Islam
can teach Christianity: it is a brief remark that Islam is "brave"
whereas Christians are "spineless".  What exactly is this
spinelessness about?  And what does bravery of this sort entail?
Another example is the reference to Icarus who is couched in terms of
self-sacrifice whereas I would interpret the myth as one of hubris,
not sacrifice.  A third is "to conquer nature [...]  in a Promethean
way" which, I think, does not do justice to the original myth given
the context of that comment.

With regard to the title of the video---"How to combat Hedonism"---it
already frames hedonism as an inimical force and expects us to take
this as a given.  Before we even listen to the arguments, we are
expected to pick a side.  At around the 46:00 mark in the video,
Peterson describes hedonism as impulsive, short-sighted, and
essentially naive as it _"backfires on you the next day"_.  This is
exactly what I asked in my latest presentation: why take this school
of thought, or any belief for that matter, and argue against its naive
version?  And this is why I talked about drug abuse, because it is not
about seeking pleasure yet is mistakenly taken that way.

It is easy to triumph over the silly variant of every idea.  What I
want is to take the argument seriously and not essentially make fun of
it.  This is why I said that we have the conventional wisdom where
hedonism is necessarily bad: it sets up an artificial divide between
responsibility and recklessness where the pursuit of pleasure is
inherently reckless.  Yet seeking pleasure can be done responsibly
because we have knowledge and are purposeful in our actions, hence the
falsehood of this dichotomy.  Also, arguing that pleasure is
inherently irresponsible is problematic for the person who makes that
claim: does the person not seek any pleasure in their life?  Maybe
they do it in a balanced way, which is precisely what I talked about.

Combating a naive version of a theory is like making an argument
against the teachings of Jesus by saying that the local priest is a
crook.  Sure, any given priest may be corrupt though that says nothing
about the teachings of Jesus as such.

What we can do in the face of a naive proponent of a theory is to tell
them that they fail to convince us with their actions, not mere words.
This is also a point I make in the video on discipline and
self-restraint (basically: don't talk big, but lead by example):
<https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-10-27-discipline-self-restraint/>.

At around the 1:30:00 mark in Peterson's video, hedonists are
described as manic people, again insisting on the notion of short-term
naivety because it frames pleasure only in the sense of its immediate
feedback.  But what about sustained pleasure?  Is anyone out there
actively seeking to be chronically ill, for example?  And is that
somehow morally superior to the pleasure of a balanced life which is a
gift that keeps giving?

This is why I covered the concept of presence in my video, to explain
that "presence" is not a proxy for the lack of an attention span, nor
is it bereft of longer-term thinking.  Rather, it is a matter of how
we go about conducting ourselves in the face of uncertainty and the
reality of our finite resources: if we keep thinking without acting,
we will never escape as we will never be 100% certain about
everything.  We perform a leap of faith, which is what the
here-and-now is all about.

Fair to Peterson though, at the 1:32:00 mark he says that "it is not
even hedonism, it is narrow, impulsive, immature 2-year-old hedonism".
This is exactly my thought, so I would suggest we don't call it
"hedonism" at all and be honest about it at the outset.  Which means
that all the talk about hedonists being manic and impulsive was a
straw argument and we just wasted our time giving too much value to
the stupidity of "2-year-olds".

To be clear, I am not "team hedonism".  My nuanced critique is that we
try to reduce complex phenomena to team red versus team blue.  The
multifacetedness of our condition means that we will have to deal with
a bit of everything and will need to find a balance therein, given the
imperfect circumstances we labour in.

Since I watched the entire episode, I provide some more comments.

## The significance of the whole

Between 08:30 and 09:30 there is a thread on how the sense of a
unifying purpose adds significance to smaller components or otherwise
mundane actions.  Kreeft then remarked that polytheism declined
because it lacked the unifying narrative that Abrahamic religions
have.

Given that this is a brief aside, I will not try to read too much into
it.  It sounds incorrect.  Polytheistic cultures lived just fine for
millennia without imploding under the weight of their own ostensible
mythological inadequacies.  Monotheism was enforced in many places
through fire and steel and was not simply brought about organically to
fill in the vacuum that was created by some self-induced state of social
despair among polytheists.  This includes parts of modern-day Greece
under the Roman Empire, the Baltic countries during the Prussian
Crusade, African tribes in the era of slave trade to the Americas, the
treatment of native American populations...

The history of ideas is dirty and we already get a sense of this from
our everyday experience with politics.  It is not today's politics
that are this way, mind you: the kind of excesses we witness today
have existed in prior societies.  Unlike intellectuals who can
exchange views in a spirit of sincerity and reach consensus, history
is full of stories of subjugation and control.

This is not an indictment on the ideas themselves, but rather a
reminder that good ideas do not prevent bad people from misusing them.
We still need to be guided by wisdom.  We all make mistakes.  The
spread of religious views can have or has had political reasons
associated with it and is/was not merely a matter of peoples changing
their customs during a process of undisturbed contemplation.

The same can be said for secular views.  Think, for instance, how the
French Republic prohibits religious symbols in public schools.  The
state is enforcing its _laïcité_: this is not some fair dialogue
between secularists and theists.

The psychological explanation on the demise of polytheism also raises
an important question about how we got to today's more secular views
of the world, given our historical trajectory.  If, say, Medieval
Europe, which was devoutly Christian and, at times, theocratic, had
found the correct narrative for addressing the existential angst of
people, was that a society worth living in?  Was it genuinely better
than today and, if so, in what ways?  What went wrong and why are we
here, then?  Are modern theocracies that enforce their monotheistic
traditions the sort of milieux that empower people and, if so, how?

My point is that we may be comparing today's unpleasant quotidian
realities to some idealised "tradition".  This is not helpful.
Whatever we juxtapose to its ideal will be found lacking.  The real
challenge is whether we ever reached that ideal state.  Did we really
have a golden age of human happiness that we somehow destroyed?  And
if we did destroy it ourselves, it probably was not that "golden"
after all as we still were foolish.  Could it be that human life
always is messy and this is only tangentially about whatever grand
narratives we have, monotheistic, polytheistic, or otherwise?

## Faith in scientific atheism

I have also noted in several publications that we act on the basis of
faith and as such agree with Peterson and Kreeft.  Faith is inevitable
because (i) we are not omniscient and (ii) our life unfolds through
action.  We have to act on the basis of imperfect information, meaning
that we can only hope that something happens/exists the way we need it
to.

This generic or latent faith, however, is not the same as belief in
any given coherent narrative.  To believe in that way is to proceed
from a position of certitude: you claim to know that which you have
faith in.

In practice, the two may be the same though the distinction still
matters conceptually as it influences one's disposition.  The one who
only operates on the basis of generic faith does not need to unlearn
something in order to withdraw from a position of certainty.  It is
easier for them to revise their views in the face of cogent
counter-arguments or available evidence, provided they are honest
about it.

Though this practical distinction depends on the person and I would
not generalise those as "good VS bad" or anything along those lines.

Personally, I think atheism is inconsistent with science because it
constitutes a prior truth: the person claims to know that there is no
god, yet has no means of proving it definitively.  The only dubitative
view, in this regard, is agnosticism.  Namely: the central theological
topic is obscure and we have no sufficient method to prove or
disapprove the verity of our views about it.

Still, what matters is the way a person behaves.  One can be a theist
and still act godlessly (e.g. commit genocide) and one can be an
atheist and still have an implicit God that informs all their
decisions.
