---
title: "Art and its narrative"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I comment on modern art, the importance of narrative, and the function of structure in our life."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *


I just watched [What is Art?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bj7FJGrxtXY) by the
ever-informative _Great Art Explained_ channel. It focuses on the work
of Marcel Duchamp. To me, there is a more general theme about the
importance of narrative in our lives. It is how we frame the world and
dictates what we understand therein by means of interpretation.

At one level, I find the salient point of modern art persuasive.
Without the overarching narrative, any given item loses its original
set of meanings or acquires a different set of meanings altogether.
Art must then be alive, for it is always in a process of being
discovered, being thought of anew as a stimulus that engenders
thoughts and evokes emotions in its observer. There is no singular
meaning to a work of art and, more importantly, it is not inherent to
the artefact as such.

This is, for example, why a person of a different culture may think of
ancient Greek nude statues as indecent (or worse). Such a person
applies a different set of values to the objects, to the effect that
what they interpret is conditioned by what they already believe to be
good or true.

[ Also watch/listen to my long video: [Why are Greek gods
naked?](https://protesilaos.com/books/2024-08-18-philosophy-why-greek-gods-naked/)
(2024-08-18). ]

Modern art thus challenges us to keep an open mind and to not think of
the world of human affairs as having clear delineations between its
various facets. Our understanding of objective magnitudes, such as
beauty, are underpinned by conceptual frameworks which are, in one way
or another, subjectively construed through cultural processes. We can
still express preference, in the form of liking some work of art more
than another, though we cannot draw indelible lines that demarcate
where art begins and where it ends. It is why concepts such as beauty
cannot be perfectly defined: you know it when you feel it.

Still, I am not at ease with the lengths to which modern art has gone
to make us tolerate ambiguity. I think that in its effort to prove its
point, it becomes a caricature of itself that must always remind us
that we cannot put it in a box. As such, the artist renders their self
irrelevant in the process because everyone is an artist in some way,
if we are willing to perform the requisite mental gymnastics.

For instance, in the video we are presented to a quote from Marcel
Duchamp that _"while all artists were not chess players, all chess
players were artists."_ This is, again, a statement about narrative
although here we no longer limit the discussion to values and ideas
but to the very activity involved. If playing chess is art because of
all the possible ways it can be played, then so is digging ditches.
You can do them by hand, with a mattock or pickaxe, in quick bursts of
action or long sessions, while wearing a cap or being topless, during
the summer or in the winter, et cetera. The conclusion from this line
of reasoning is that "all is art", perhaps once we rule out some
exceptions to the rule. What does that make of someone like Marcel
Duchamp then? Are there artists anymore?

Once we tear down all structures, we are left in a state of
meaninglessness, where art itself cannot exist as a distinct category
because it is indistinguishable from non-art. All such binaries
collapse into themselves and there is nothing left to say about them.
This is not because the original theme of being mindful of the
prevailing narrative is wrong, but due to the absence of any frame of
reference with which to discern---and thus order---patterns in our
milieu.

So while I agree that, strictly speaking, the notion of art VS non-art
has no defined boundaries, it still is useful for us to think in those
terms. Perhaps we cannot define the concepts involved in the most
precise way, though this does not imply that we are necessarily
labouring under illusions. What we are doing may still be rooted in
some objective magnitude, however elusive. Otherwise, the unique
genius of a work like _Aphrodite of Melos_ is equivalent to some
3-year-old moving chess pieces on a board for the first time.

It thus comes down to practicality. A frame of reference, however
defined, has to be in place for us to be in a position to tell this
apart from that. If all is the same, nothing means anything and the
very idea of "art" is devoid of absurd. The question then is whether
contemporary art has empowered us to express our selves by rendering
conspicuous the function of narratives in our life or is undermining
artistry altogether. If Marcel Duchamp can sign a bidet and thus
transform it into art, then all we need is some public figure to label
whatever they want as the pinnacle of aesthetics. Art critics will
follow up on that to explain to us, in ever the obscurantist language,
how we are too narrow-minded to understand the value therein and why
this is, in fact, a stroke of mastery. Art then may be about the
weaving of the narrative, decoupled from any tangible contribution.

In the absence of standards, we end up with an abundance of mediocrity
that passes off as excellence. Indeed, "excellence" has no standing.
The political and economic ramifications are far-reaching. Those who
could spend a lifetime perfecting their craft may instead become
social media influencers and use their platform to produce art out of
toilet paper. But why even have people do that when AI can just as
well mass produce "possibilities" the way chess players do, to return
to the aforementioned quote of Marcel Duchamp.

This is ultimately not about art but about how we conceptualise our
existence. Having a point of reference gives us the basis to not only
appreciate those who try hard but also to call out the charlatans. In
politics, we can tell apart a domain expert from someone who never
read a book in their life. In the economy, we can identify productive
entrepreneurs from snake oil merchants. In sport, we know who is elite
and who is not fit for the game. And so on.

It is one thing to dismantle existing narratives. It is another to
propose what we should be doing instead once nothing is left standing.
Do we try to set up something again---and is that not yet another
narrative?---or do we subsist in tautologies and confusion? This is
how the thinker is undone by their own overthinking. It is why I value
practicality in my philosophy and believe that what matters is not
what we say, but what we do. Once we couch our ideas in terms of
action, we develop a better sense of where to stop and not to
generalise further, for the limits of the mind are not those of the
body, yet the embodied mind is all we have as humans.
