---
title: "Rewilding our conscience"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I comment at length about a natural way of living and its values."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

Writing for _Psyche_ magazine in an article titled [Rewilding attachment
theory by recognising Earth as a caregiver](https://psyche.co/ideas/rewilding-attachment-theory-by-recognising-earth-as-a-caregiver),
Vanessa Chakour argues for a broadened understanding of human
emotional development:

> Aren’t the environments that influence our emotional lives both
> social and natural? Yes, we are raised by people, but we are also
> raised by the Earth. As recent research is showing, the natural
> world can play an important role in our emotional lives, offering a
> sense of security and belonging, and reducing anxiety and stress.
> Perhaps there is a missing ecological dimension to Bowlby and
> Ainsworth’s theory. To really understand our emotional lives, do we
> need to rewild attachment theory?

The article is framed in terms of scientific discourse which, I think,
is fruitful albeit limited. Factsheets are helpful to keep us in
check, though they do not inspire most people to behave virtuously
throughout. Think of all the well-known facts about the harms of
tobacco, alcohol, junk food... People just ignore them and carry on
with their lives. Scientists themselves are not adhering to a strictly
scientific--cold facts and logic only---modus operandi in every facet
of their life: they instead have to assume the role of the scientist
for certain tasks but will otherwise exhibit the well-known human
behavioural traits.

## The story-telling beings

We have emotions beside reason and are forced by the circumstances to
operate on the basis of imperfect information. The guide to everyday
life cannot be merely scientific, because (i) we do not have all the
answers and (ii) those who are consistently sceptical in their
lifestyle are the exceptions to the rule. Still, I agree with Vanessa
Chakour's salient point, and think it is worth pursuing a rewilding of
many parts of our life.

At first, there will be pioneers who lead a lifestyle that is aligned
with natural cycles. Though, eventually, a larger-scale change of
conscience has to be rooted in religiosity. There must be a
mythological backdrop that appeals to the common folk. Its narratives
have to be awe inspiring to capture the imagination of young and old
ones alike. Nobody ever did fan art about some data table, while there
are countless artefacts across all cultures about fictional characters
and stories.

We are story-telling beings: myths are inseparable from the human
experience. Our shared ethos has to have such a component of
awesomeness through imagination. Furthermore, religion is
communitarian in its practice, which fulfils the individual's need for
belonging, ceteris paribus (consistent with the topics of "security"
and "attachment" covered in the aforementioned article) and, more
importantly, introduces its members to certain ideas without expecting
them to already be highly accomplished intellectuals.

The rewilding, then, is not only a matter of tweaking contemporary
scientific theories to add nature as a parameter in their models. It
is about broadening our thinking to escape from its anthropocentric
value judgements. To this end, opposition to religion per se is
misguided. It has to be more eclectic by standing against only the
destructive forms of religiosity, dogmatism and fanaticism, which
engender intolerance towards anything they do not understand or
consider alien.

## The immanent mind

To think of the Earth as a care-giver, we have to first recognise in
it a certain conscience, or spirit, or soul/mind. We cannot treat it
as a pile of soil and rock in the same way we do not see a human as a
mere amalgamation of flesh and bone. This is perhaps difficult for
modern people, because we are conditioned to think in reductionist
terms, while large parts of the population grow up in cities with
little connection to untouched natural settings.

If human is a system of systems, emerging from, say, the subatomic
level, to the organs, to the gestalt form "human", and if these strata
of emergent phenomena eventually give rise to conscience, we have to
ask whether there is a terminus to this process. Does the emergence of
conscience stop at the stratum of the human organism as a whole? Why?
That seems arbitrary. If an organism is a system of systems, and if
that can be mindful qua system of systems, then so can greater systems
of systems, like forests, oceans, the Earth as a whole, planetary
arrangements, galaxies, and more.

It is intuitive to think of mind as a facet of life and life as
ubiquitous. If we assume a linear relationship, something must come
from something: there can be no cause in nothing. And then we must
apply the same logic to this "something". Ultimately, the linear
relationship is not helpful because even if we call this the ultimate
God, we still have to inquire about what caused God, where was God
made manifest, and so on. It cannot be outside the world, because in
that case there necessarily exists a third magnitude which encompasses
God and the world. This third magnitude will have to be the greater
whole, which itself is not caused by anything (else we repeat the
thought). I have thus have come to the same conclusion as the ancient
Greeks: the cosmos always is, ever-present and ever-lasting, with no
external magnitude to it and thus no sense of internal aspect either.
It all is as "all together", which is the literal meaning of the Greek
word for universe (synpan, σύμπαν), from "syn" (together or jointly)
and "pan" (all).

Change occurs in the manifestations of the immanent logos (reason,
cause, ratio, pattern, language). We understand logos through the
particulars, in the same way we observe the laws of nature in
phenomena, not in themselves. Forms of life come and go, in an
incessant process of transfiguration of the same "star dust" we all
consist of. Life is always there, even though the cycle of each
manifestation has a beginning and end. "Life" is the totality of
interlinked phenomena, which reveal the underlying logos.

Each presence is co-presence, always framed, informed, conditioned,
influenced, or otherwise determined, by other presences, such that the
individual mind is but the observable aspect of the very mechanisms
that underpin all the factors in their interplay. Human does not
emerge in isolation from the rest of a world: it is the product of the
same processes that unfold all around us. Whatever human does, is in
the potential of the cosmos. We can play music with wooden sticks and
rocks, for example, because wood and stone have inherent musicality,
which is expressed through the actions of the performer, though not
bestowed by the performer on them.

Think about rationality. Some will associate it only with humans,
while others who have a bit more experience will point out how animals
and plants also behave rationally: animals will minimise their motions
to conserve energy when it is too hot, for example, while plants will
seek to maximise their exposure to the sun. Whatever the case, most
people will consider rationality as a quality of familiar forms of
life: it is not widespread in the cosmos. I believe this is wrong, as
we can always find reason in phenomena, provided we broaden our scope.
Consider water, which does not seem to have any behavioural patterns
of its own: flowing water will follow the path of least resistence. We
would call this "rational" if it were an engineering scheme, for how
it manages to make the most with what it has. So rather than think of
water in isolation, we have to account for the contributing factors to
the phenomenon to arrive at an understanding of the greater organism.
Same principle if we were observing a human at its atomic level: there
is no apparent rationality of the conventional sort at that level.
This does not mean there is no rationality once we zoom out a bit.

## The Earth as another organism

The goal then is to have a sense of perspective. For the Earth, we
cannot afford to think of, say, a lake in isolation. We have to
consider it in the wider context of ecosystems, of how all those
factors work in tandem. Part of this endeavour is scientific, though I
will stress the importance of a religious counterpart to it, for that
is what informs our basis of values.

If, like polytheistic/pantheistic/animistic worldviews, we recognise
mind in the environment we inhabit, we will know not to destroy it.
Our wellness is connected to its wellness. Our values are key in how
we conduct ourselves. The Amazon rainforests, for example, stood there
for millenia, with indigenous tribes respecting their habitat. Whereas
now, a disrespectful populace who thinks God is somewhere "outside"
and thus this world is for us to exploit with impunity, is abusing the
land for short-term profit wihout understanding that without our
environment we too shall perish.

The Earth and the Sky are our parents in more than a figurative sense:
they make our life possible. If we see in them parental figures, we
will more likely be disposed to consider the consequences of our
actions. Similarly, our wider community is what makes us who we are
and we know that our individual actions reflect on how it is
pereceived as a whole. This gives us a sense of responsibility, of
thinking about the bigger picture, and of not being self-absorbed.

As the parent has a responsibility not to spoil the child, so does the
Earth and Sky punish those who do not know their limits. It is thus
pertitent to describe natural forces in neutral terms, rather than
idolise them as purely good. Notions of "good" and "evil" only apply
to a subset of human affairs and are relevant only to the extent that
we conform with whatever is desirable in a given culture. Nature
simply is and will find a new equilibrium whether we like it or not,
with or without us. In the forests we will find food but may also meet
our death. The forest is neither good nor bad. This is why, for
example, in the Greek religion, Artemis (the personification of the
wilds) and Poseidon (the personification of the waters), are not
always friendly towards humans.

Natural magnitudes are not there to take care of us alone. That is an
anthropocentic obsession we had better discard. They will provide for
humans insofar as we know our place in the world and do not take more
than we actually need. Same with the idea of providence as a
human-focused predesign: providence exists as the already embedded
logos in things, which ensures presences will be orderly within the
greater order of the cosmos. It has nothing to do with some God qua
24/7 call centre who answers all our prayers, centres the world around
us, and tends to our whims---that is a caricature of the divine.

The Earth is an organism which has the capacity to adapt to evolving
states of affairs. It is okay for us to, say, cut down some grass to
make way for our homestead. The key is to not be greedy, to make up
for what we took by giving something else in return, such as by
planting more trees and safeguarding the surrounding biodiversity.
Again, religiosity is fine because it leaves room for common sense,
while dogmatism/fanaticism is fixated on conformity with its own rules
and thus becomes intolerant and destructive in the process.

## Life at the hut

Having lived here for almost a full year, I can tell how much my
environment has further contributed to my calmness and overall
disposition. It does not offer much in terms of what most people
consider exciting, though it is enough to sustain me and keep me
tranquil.

I have a better sense of how things take their time to happen, like an
acorn that will grow into a majestic oak tree over the course of
centuries. I am thus even more patient and better prepared to accept
what is in the here-and-now. The fact that [I no longer mindlessly put
on some music](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2024-04-12-the-music-all-around/),
is a testament to how the Earth Mother can heal us from unhealthy
habits, excessive rhythms, and unrealistic wants.

I opted for this lifestyle in large part because I had to, though I
have for many years now been living a more simple life. "Simple" in
the sense of having optional dependencies that I am prepared to forgo.

I am missing the communitarian dimension for the time being, which I
believe would have to be expressed as religiosity at scale (not for me
necessarily, though I do not think only of my case). I miss this not
because I cannot find people around, but because they are not
recognising in nature the greater organism that envelops us. Even when
they are physically close, their conscience is far withdrawn from it.
Our values do not converge.

Maybe there will be plenty of rewilded people in my life who have
realised that we do not need to be mindless robots in the machinery of
profit-making. They will recognise that they have long now been
moulded into the artificial intelligence that supports the modern
civilisation; "artificial" because it runs contrary to basic human
needs, such as living in an open space, getting enough exposure to the
sun, breathing fresh air, exploring the open vistas, and operating in
accordance with the natural cycles instead of whimsy.
