---
title: "The wolf within"
excerpt: "An entry from my journal where I explore the animal nature of our being, based on my personal experiences."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

Nights during the last quarter of the moon are dark. The temperature
in the mountains drops to low levels no matter how warm it is during
the day. Summertime usually lasts until mid-September here. It then
gradually gets cooler, while the possibility of sporadic rainfall
increases. Cyprus is fairly dry though. It is only during the winter
when it rains a lot.

Living outside the confines of any built up area has brought me closer
to the natural cycles. I notice the phases of the moon and the
trajectory of the sun in the sky. They change throughout the year.
What happens with regularity, for example, is that the full moon
always rises from the east as soon as the sun sets. Perhaps this is a
coincidence, but I have observed it consistently. It is beautiful.

I also notice how total daylight changes throughout the year. We are
now well past the summer solstice, meaning that days are getting
smaller until they reach their lowest point at the winter solstice.
For my hut, this practically means that from around mid-October to
mid-February, I have very limited exposure to direct sunlight. I
switch off the desktop computer at around 14:00 hours and work on the
laptop to prolong battery capacity until ~22:00. If I do not do that,
I will run out of power early in the evening.

Me and the dogs go for a long walk in the morning and then at night.
It does not matter if it is very dark outside, such as between the
last quarter moon and the rise of the new moon. We still enjoy our
little adventure. The air is cool, our pace is fast, and we remain
alert. I find that this otherwise exhilarating experience relaxes me,
even though it would seem odd to consider it a "relaxing moment" like,
say, sitting on the sofa to watch TV (which I do not have, anyway).

So what is it that makes the venture outdoors relaxing? I think it has
to do with the appeasement of the animal within. I know from my
experience training/handling dogs that the most content and reliable
animals are the ones that are given an outlet for their instincts:
they need to run, sniff around, and, generally, keep their apex
predator functions in good working condition. Dogs that are confined
to tight spaces all day tend to have accumulated stress, are more
aggressive, and less trustworthy. In short, the good dog is the
naturally tired dog.

Humans are much closer to dogs and their wolf relatives than some are
perhaps willing to admit. Like them, we are gregarious, tribalist,
territorial, predatory, socially cooperative and competitive, as well
as vainglorious. It is why in many situations _homo homini lupus est_
(_"human to humans wolf is"_). We do have a more pronounced rational
side, though the notion of human as a rational agent quickly falls
apart as soon as we observe everyday in vivo human behaviour.

Perhaps, then, the wolf within us is not something to be feared or
demonised but to be understood. We need action as our mind seeks to
explore new vistas, either literally or through our imagination. For
some, this is expressed as a physical impulse for adventure, while for
others it is more intellectual. In my case, it is definitely both. I
expend a lot of energy doing physically intense activities, yet I
still need to satisfy my innate curiosity within the realm of
concepts. To me, both are adventures of sorts which keep me calm,
composed, and reliable.

Like the dogs that have an outlet for their ferocity, so do humans
benefit from some degree of openendedness. Not too much to feel lost
and insecure, but enough to appease the adventurer within. At a
personal level, I find that pushing myself to new challenges---be it a
hard day of physical labour or the elucidation of some concept (or
usually both)---makes me more peaceful and, indeed, contemplative. If
I am forced to stay in a small space for too long, I feel limited and
ultimately disempowered. Perhaps this is why I could not tolerate a
career in politics and the office life that goes with it. In which
case, everything I experienced as a profound unsettlement is down to
the disturbance of the wolf within.

To me, no amount of meditation or whatever spiritual practice is a
substitute for openendedness. Like the apex predator, I need to put
myself out there, to roam the wilds, as it were. The more I accomplish
in the process, the greater my confidence is in my ability to take
care of myself (and any others, by extension). Thus, the visceral fear
of unsafety is kept in check and I can then focus on contributing to
culture.

It may be that the suppression of the wild animal engenders an elusive
uneasiness and concomitant lack of confidence which, in turn, produces
a subtle yet persistent disturbance in the person's mind. One may then
be sad or somehow in need of a change of scenery, without realising
why.

I am speculating rampantly here, though I can tell that when I rise to
meet a challenge head on, I do it with intensity and alertness. There
is neither complacency nor fear in those moments. I tap in to my
potential and commit fully to the task at hand. This is because I am
not trying to suppress the wolf within, but to instead transform its
ruthlessness into a constructive force.

My nature is highly competitive, though this is only inward. I do not
measure myself up to others. I simply try to push my own boundaries.
If I can walk for one hour while talking philosophy, I want to reach a
point where I can do this for two hours, and maybe three, and so on.
There is no real target. The goal, or perhaps the precondition of my
tranquil life, is to continuously find new frontiers; to howl in
valleys I have not yet traversed.

I carry on with my work. There is no moment where I feel lazy about
it. Every day I have the exuberance for yet more action. This wolf is
not going to be tamed any time soon, I guess... So I conclude with
this poem, which I will publish separately in [the poems' section of
my website](https://protesilaos.com/poems):

```
Man and wolf

When man and wolf are one
there is but lightness
Dark are the spaces
where individuality is suppressed
```
