---
title: "The start is half the way to the goal"
excerpt: "An entry from my journal where I comment on the importance of starting a project in earnest."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

Yesterday I finished work at 9 PM. I did a lot of manual labour during
the day and then continued with some projects on the computer. After I
was done with everything, I felt too tired to go for my nightly long
walk with the dogs. Normally, those walks last an hour or so. They are
shorter only if the weather conditions are unfavourable. But we always
go, no matter what. Last night was especially hard though, so I
allowed myself to take it easy by committing to a 10-minute walk
instead. I wanted to do it for the dogs... We eventually walked for
more than hour. The feeling of fatigue I had disappeared as soon as I
warmed up.

This was not a surprise to me. There is a Greek saying that comes to
us from antiquity, which states that "the start is the half of
everything" (_η αρχή είναι το ήμισυ του παντός_). The idea is that
when we set out to do something, the most difficult part is to make
the initial commitment. Once we get in the flow, we develop momentum
and can go all the way.

I think the tricky part is with how we manage our expectations about
the kind of goal we have in mind when we start a project. If the goal
is unrealistic, then the start will not amount to much. But if what we
want is within our means, then we can maintain the motivation to make
things happen.

The key in my case yesterday was the flexibility I demonstrated in
setting a standard for myself. I believe I would not have left home
had I insisted that the walk be an hour long. Ten minutes are easy for
me, so lowering the target that much gave me no excuse to stay home. I
knew this would be trivial and I intentionally challenged my sense of
pride.

I discovered a variation on this theme a long time ago. Back then I
was trying to "be productive". Inspired by the Getting Things Done
methodology, I would spell out all the subtasks of a project, have a
highly detailed and prescriptive plan, and then try to do everything
in the predetermined order. But I quickly realised this was not
working for me: the sheer number of tasks combined with the rigidity
of the agenda was forcing me into inaction. It was too intimidating to
wrestle with that massive, cumbersome beast!

I thus learnt to focus on the main points and not record every piece
of trivia. The list of total tasks was shorter, the sequence of
foreseen events was more open-ended, and the work felt easier as a
result. I would allow myself to discover the obvious subtasks through
the process of mindful action.

Perhaps we demotivate ourselves when we make something bigger than it
is. If I have a goal to "buy groceries from the local store", I do not
need to also spell out the implicit subtasks, such as "pick up your
wallet", "take your keys", "make sure everything is okay at home",
"wear your shoes", "buy 5 tomatoes and 10 onions", and so on. These
are rendering explicit patterns of mine and knowledge which are
already well embedded in my conduct. I do not need to be reminded of
them. If they appear on my task list, they crowd out the items I do
need to remember. Thus they are producing noise and increasing the
cognitive burden.

By simplifying tasks and not being a control freak, I put faith in my
future self to (i) think critically, (ii) adapt to evolving states of
affairs, and (iii) maintain a sense of agency. Whereas if I am
micromanaging everything in the present, I am treating my future self
as someone who is not reliable. And so, not only am I producing a
seemingly gigantic list of superfluous tasks, I am also infantilising
my future self. For me, this is disempowering.

The start being half of the total must then depend on the application
of common sense. This is two-fold:

1. The goal is realisable. We set ourselves up to do something that we
   know is within our means or, in the case of ambitious targets, that
   is not too far away from our best performance.
2. We take it one step at a time instead of focusing on the whole
   project. This way, our sight is set on some smaller action that is
   manageable. The cumulative effect of those is the realisation of
   the project.

When we estimate our ability to finalise a project, we make
self-evaluations both for the subtasks and for the whole project. I
think all need to be realistic, though not necessarily perfectly
certain. For as long as we have a solid plan, we can trust in our
capacity to adapt. Our actions can thus be flexible as we acknowledge
the fact that we often build the capacity to do what is necessary
while doing it.

I had not built a house before setting up the hut. Yet I knew that I
would get better at it while in the process of building it, so I did
not let my initial evaluation intimidate me. There is room for growth.
We have to be open to that possibility for it to be made manifest.

My walk last night reminded me of the latent power we have and how
pushing ourselves ever so slightly does no harm. I could have
convinced myself to stay home and chill. That would have been fine,
anyway. Yet I opted for a compromise deal instead: to do something,
even if not at the full intensity. The fact that I did go all the way
is due to the lightness with which I was conducting myself: I had no
expectation to do anything difficult. At the same time, I was allowing
myself the chance to grow into the role, which is how I ended up doing
the full hour.

I am happy with how things turned out. I continue with the same
commitment and intensity.
