---
title: "Searching for purpose in the changing seasons"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I comment on the need we have to find purpose in everything we do."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

It is a cloudy day. The past weekend was rainy. My country went
through several months of draught. Some of my plants---strawberries,
grapevines, and a few trees---did not survive, despite my best
efforts. Conditions are more favourable now. I will continue trying in
full knowledge that my power is limited. The world will continue to go
through its cycles despite my intentions and regardless of my will.
All I can do is conform with what this state of affairs renders
unavoidable: live the moment, the sequence of moments that is
impressed upon my conscience as my life.

It is tempting to ask whether there is any point to all this. Why
should I bother with the plants, when it makes no difference in the
grand scheme of things? More generally, why express any preference
when all that is perishable shall perish and thus whatever I made will
disappear accordingly? I have no way of knowing whether the cosmos has
an end, let alone what the specifics of that may be. Religiosity is,
in a way, human's attempt at filling in these gaps: to provide an
answer or, at least, a satisfactory narrative about the cause of being
and the reason for being.

I do not need such a justification to carry on living. Grounding my
moment-by-moment experience in some theology adds nothing to what is
already inherent. When I observe the changing colours in those oak
trees, I feel wonder and amazement. It is not because some priest told
me this is the right thing to do. Each time I am in awe, I react
spontaneously. There is a sense of connecting with something greater,
which eludes rationalisation, yet which nevertheless is unmistakably
distinct from other experiences. Any given narrative is bound to
appeal to my reason, in an attempt to convince me of its merits and
truth. But my immediate environment does not have to persuade me in
any way: it just is and I, guided by what is built into me, find
resonance in what is immanent throughout.

I think we are miserable when we cannot appreciate moments unless they
fit into a neat analytical framework. Theology is, in this sense, a
product of rationality like science (yes, I know...), which finds its
terminus in the constraints of human language. One may not capture the
beauty of a sunset or a close-up encounter with eagles through words:
they may only experience it. Yet words is all we have to convey in
written form; useful, for sure, though imperfect. Instead of
recognising that what is written is subject to interpretation and thus
not a priori true, we expend our energy trying to find some deeper
meaning in our works and from it arrive at the grand purpose behind
everything. We thus make things complicated.

The world cannot care about every one of us and treat us all as
special. This sense of self-importance is at odds with the
indifference of the natural magnitudes to the prevailing conditions
that inform one's subjectivity. When there is no rainfall, it is not
that the gods specifically want us to learn a lesson---not least
because teaching a lesson in a manner that is subject to many
interpretations is ineffective---but that we happen to be present in a
state of affairs that causes rain to happen. This does not mean that
there is no immanent mind in the cosmos, but that it is not
anthropocentic the way we would like it to be.

What I find around me is a living universe. This is a continuum of
life everlasting, with forms of life coming and going. Process,
pattern, ratio, cause are all expressions of the mindful matter we are
made of, immersed in, conditioned by, and in interaction with. I
cannot tell why this is the case and what the goal is. All I know,
based on my intuitions, is that I have a certain presence in this
present. Should the presence change, it would be, at best, be a
different presence in another subjectively understood present.

I freed myself from the angst of justifying my being, of basing it in
some higher authority. I have let go of all the narratives we have
about who we are. I am not anymore special than the birds around me.
If I can continue to survive is because I am in some ways more potent
than them. But this does not make me special: other forces are more
powerful still.

Life forms around me inspire me to not worry about matters that are
none of my business. If there is an almighty God, then it already is
omnipotent so me providing a helping hand makes a mockery of said
omnipotence. If there is an omniscient God, nothing I will ever do
will teach it anything, as that would run counter to the notion of
omniscience. An omnipotent and omniscient God does not need to run any
experiment and does not require any assistance whatsoever. This alone
makes all the religious preoccupations pointless, despite their claims
to the contrary.

What I do is trivial and this is okay. I shall plant more trees not
out of a conviction that the world depends on my actions and I must
thus do the right thing, but only based on the fact that this presence
of mine, in its particular constitution, is disposed to behave in
certain ways. Whether there is a purpose is not for me to decide. I
will continue to act, as I cannot afford otherwise, and I will
continue to age in the process.

These changing seasons, the inevitability of it all, do not disempower
me. No! They have liberated me from the aspiration to live in a
perfectly comfortable world where every question has its complete
answer. Instead, I tolerate discomfort and uncertainty. When I
experience a certain moment, I experience it for what it is and not
based on whether I will be around again to live it one more time.

In the here-and-now of my presence, I will continue to do what I can.
It is neither good nor bad. It simply is. Matters of propriety are
relevant for our own affairs as people and how we perceive of our
relationship to the rest of the planet, though those too are
significant in a limited sense. The world still does not depend on
them.

To live simply. How difficult can this be?
