---
title: "Controlled discomfort"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I comment on cold showers and what they mean to my everyday life."
---

The following is an excerpt from my journal.

* * *

I just arrived home from my evening walk through the mountains. The
sky is clouded. Combined with the fact that there is no moon at this
stage, the night is as dark as it gets. Darkness in the wild engenders
in me a mixture of peace and alertness. It is meditative, in the sense
that I can more easily identify---and expound upon---concepts that are
of immediate interest to me. My creativity benefits greatly, as I
discover themes worth elucidating. Combined with the heightened sense
of focus that remains active for a few hours, I am able to write at
length and with regularity. I do it for myself. There never is a
target audience. It is an expression of enthusiasm for something I
enjoy.

Tomorrow is the 1st of October. Days get shorter with each passing
day. Temperature levels are dropping too. They reach 25 degrees
Celsius during the day and fall to around 12 degrees at night. I have
for a few weeks now been experimenting with taking shirtless walks at
this hour. The idea is to expose myself to the cold in order to test
how I cope with it and to assess if this increased vulnerability has
an impact on the aforementioned heightened focus I experience.

Topless nighttime hiking sounds insane, so I have to provide more
context. First off, I do them at night because it is colder and I do
not want to offend any potential passers by (even though it is quiet
in the mountains). Secondly, this new practice is an extension of my
long-established habit of bathing exclusively with cold water. I have
been taking cold showers for more than five years now. The rationale
is three-fold:

1. **A proxy for my overall health.** Tolerance to cold seems to me
   like a decent quick check that I can carry out at home to figure
   out if some of my body's subsystems are functioning properly. I
   remember when I would have a fever and would not tolerate even
   lukewarm water, so I assume that tolerance to cold is, ceteris
   paribus, a suggestion that I am okay (of course, this is but a
   single point of data).
2. **A real test of living with less.** Hot water is the byproduct of
   some fairly advanced infrastructure. By learning to live without
   it, I make myself more economically resilient. This is not some
   theoretical advantage. I have been benefiting from this during the
   entirety of my project to live at the hut. Because I have not
   needed the setup of a boiler, with all its accompanying pipework, I
   have avoided a significant cost that would have otherwise imposed
   robust constraints on my plans. Whereas now I am living without it
   and can use my limited resources on more pressing issues (having
   hot water is nice, in case I ever have guests). Furthermore, this
   is a tangible sacrifice or, if we phrase it differently, a type of
   minimalism/austerity that you cannot treat lightly.
3. **An accountability structure.** Cold showers are always mildly
   uncomfortable. Doing them is not for the faint of heart. This means
   that I make it harder for myself to not debase the standard I set
   for me. It gives me the motivation to try hard and it denies me of
   an convenient excuse/rationalisation where I allow myself the easy
   way out on the premise that I "will try harder tomorrow". There is
   no "tomorrow" in such issues. Either I have the honesty towards
   myself to admit that I could not do it, or I try harder. The goal
   is to remain authentic. If I do it, it is because I can. If I do
   not do it, it is because I cannot. There never is an "I do not
   want" in this case.

Back to the night walks... I started taking off my shirt during August
to ease myself into the process. I know from cold showers that I need
to build the requisite capacity for this kind of exposure. Assuming
all goes well, I will become even more tolerant to the cold outdoors
as time goes by. But I will not write more before I do it first for,
say, a full year: there is a high chance I cannot take it anymore and
am forced to revert to my old ways.

The tricky part is the wind, which lowers the apparent temperature and
increases the bite of the cold. Showers are easy and less intimidating
by comparison because they take place in a room that is sheltered from
the elements. This is why I cannot be confident and am experimenting
with caution.

Not to imply that cold showers are easy. When I first bathed in cold
water, I had a shocking initial experience: as soon as the water
touched the most sensitive parts of the body (scalp, chest, and back)
I instinctively took a deep breath and momentarily felt like time had
paused at the point where innumerable tiny crystals were piercing
through my skin. The locus was the upper body, as the limbs are more
tolerant to cold. I found the courage to persevere by staying under
the flowing water for a few more seconds. It was enough to overcome
that pressure. I then felt in complete control. The whole experience
was still intense in how it was vitalising every fibre of my being,
but it would no longer trigger in me any sense of fear. As soon as I
was done, I had an experience of confidence that is unlike those we
normally get. It was visceral, rooted in the realisation that I could
power through such an ordeal. Subsequent showers became easier, though
remain relatively uncomfortable and have not lost their original
sharpness.

The key is consistency. If I quit, say, for a month I will have
trouble resuming the practice. The body has a propensity to find the
easiest option, which is optimal when conserving energy, but can lead
to laziness, with its longer-term downsides, if left unchecked.

What cold showers and this latest experiment of mine have in common is
the creation of controlled discomfort. I am very careful with how I
expose myself to danger. I do it in a way that does not put me at risk
and am not dogmatic about it. If I sense that I am approaching the
breaking point, I will quit. Furthermore, I am not doing any of this
on a whimsy, nor to prove a point. It is part of a balanced lifestyle.
I am careful with my diet and remain physically active throughout the
day. This has been the norm for decades.

By bringing controlled discomfort upon myself, I try to remain sharp
and capable. There is an obvious physical aspect to it, though its
mental dimension is equally important. I must show the resolve to
carry out the deed and I must maintain the discipline to stick to it
for the long-term. The capacity for such fortitude is then available
to me for all my other endeavours.

Comfort is wonderful, of course. What I value the most is peace, which
is in large part why I live in the mountains. Though I understand that
too much of it can make me more fragile, physically and mentally: I
might take too many things for granted, may forget how difficult
everything actually is, and not realise how dependant I have become on
the pampers provided by my social milieu. This is my way of telling
myself "remember your nature; remember who you are", which allows me
to contribute to civilisation what I think is essential and to not
reinforce trends that take us too far in the direction of
recklessness.
