---
title: "Eponymity and honesty"
excerpt: "In this article I use practical examples to discuss matters of selfhood, such as being consistent and reliable."
---

I have been publishing on this website since February 2011. I have
written almost two million words across 1600+ articles. The word count
is actually an underestimation of the work I do here, once we consider
that many of my publications are in long-form video format. Plus, all
this does not cover other extensive writings, such as the rich
documentation I provide as part of my programming.

All this corpus has my name attached to it. I am always expressing my
opinion eponymously. It means that I am both (i) prepared to stand
behind my views and (ii) be held accountable for any errors therein.
To me, the single most important virtue in a person is honesty, which
presupposes courage and integrity. You cannot be honest if you do not
have the courage to face your weaknesses, for example. And you cannot
be honest if, say, you do not take other people's criticism gracefully.

The Greeks call this _parrhesia_ (_παρρησία_). There are no tricks, no
gimmicks. You speak your mind in earnest, in a manner that is clear,
and you recognise when you are mistaken. It is honourable to do so.

While I value anonymity as a right, which is especially important in
combating tyranny (e.g. anonymity for whistleblowers or members of
marginalised groups), I prefer to be eponymous in my public
appearances throughout. This works as an accountability structure for
myself. I have to think things through before I commit to them. I must
express myself in a manner that gets the point across effectively,
without engendering misunderstandings. In other words, I cannot afford
to fool around.

This accountability structure keeps me honest by maintaining a high
standard in what I do; high relative to my ability. In this sense, it
conforms with an ethos of sportspersonship: to be competitive in a way
that brings out the best qualities in a person. If I am lazy about it,
such as by writing a short piece that I did not think through, then I
am debasing the standard, lowering it well below the champion grade I
aspire to be at.

Competitiveness in the form of sportpersonship is not the same as
belligerence. It is not a kind of aggression, nor is it directed
towards other people. The athlete commits to the long-term goal of
trying their best and knowing when they cannot compete anymore. It is
not about the results either, as it pertains to the intent and
overarching behavioural patterns. The intellectual shares those
qualities with the sportsperson. They, too, must live up to the
standard they have set for themselves.

As a thinker, writer, and speaker, I consider freedom of expression to
be integral to an honest society. If we cannot point out that the
emperor has no clothes, we are collectively dishonest and shall suffer
from our coyness accordingly.

Every freedom entails responsibility. Those who choose to exercise
their liberty must be prepared to deal with the consequences of their
actions. The person who is consistently free is, ceteris paribus, the
one who is responsible and resilient. So if, for instance, someone who
publishes an article cannot tolerate the fact that certain people will
disagree with it, this individual is not prepared to exercise their
freedom. It does not mean that their freedom is forfeit, but only that
they have more growing to do as a person.

Parrhesia acknowledges adversity as part of life. The diversity in
nature is also expressed as a plurality of opinions. The notion that
we can please everybody in some way is but an illusion. Each thesis
has multiple, potentially conflicting, antitheses. For as long as we
stand somewhere (thesis literally means "position"), we do it in
contrast to others.

Adversity has an impersonal form as well. To write consistently, for
example, you must show the courage and determination to push yourself
out of whatever inert state you are in. You have to work hard. There
is no faking it.

While the law stipulates the age of adulthood for all sorts of good
practical reasons, we must remember that this is not the same as
someone being mature. There are plenty of adults who lack maturity and
whose behaviour is indistinguishable from that of a child. They do not
assume responsibility and will not acknowledge that their choices have
consequences. Maturity is about sticking to something, doing it in
earnest, and dealing with its aftermath. This goes for private
projects, life style decisions, work obligations, and relationships.
Where there is freedom, there is responsibility.

There is this conventional wisdom in my country that "the army makes
you a man" (conscription for males is mandatory). I believe this is
not the case. The army forces you to conform with rules, but this does
not make you a disciplined person. It does not mean that you can set
your own rules and live in accordance with them and, by extension, it
does not guarantee you have consistency in accomplishing your tasks.
At best, the army can inspire a boy to become mature by having to deal
with adversity away from the comforts of his home.

A more reliable mark of maturity is what a person does out of their
own accord. When they commit to something they like and try to do it
as best they can without excuses. It is not about some objective high
score of who is the greatest of all time at said task, but only how
sincere and consistent the person is in the pursuit of it.

Eponymity is not a precondition for self-actualisation. It is but one
of the many ways one can hold their self accountable. There is no
right or wrong in how people go about expressing their individuality,
within the scope of the law and common sense. What matters is that we
understand freedom in its totality as rights to act in certain ways
and to deal with the concomitant phenomena. Absent that, we will
remain frivolous in our conduct and childish in how we eschew
responsibility.
