---
title: "On the continuum of rationality and mysticism"
excerpt: "An entry from my journal where I comment at length on how Platon and the ancient Greeks saw continuity between reason and mysticism."
---

This is an excerpt from my journal.

* * *

Writing for _Psyche_ magazine, Sam Woodward explains how [For Plato,
rationalists and mystics can walk the same path](https://psyche.co/ideas/for-plato-rationalists-and-mystics-can-walk-the-same-path?utm_source=rss-feed).

> We may view Plato as an archetypal rational philosopher, a thinker
> at odds with the mysticism of Eleusis. Instead, he saw common ground
> with the initiate who seeks an experience beyond the sensory realm.
> Participants in the Eleusinian Mysteries sought the divine through
> mystic ritual; Plato’s philosopher seeks eternal and ‘divine’ Forms
> by transcending the shadows of sensory perception. For Plato,
> mystery-cult initiates and rational philosophers can walk the same
> path.

To a modern person it is indeed bizarre how a "rationalist" can see
any value in religious initiation. This is because we are conditioned
to think of the human experience in a compartmentalised way. You can
either be one or the other. The rationalist will be associated with
the scientific enterprise, be considered an empiricist, and only say
what the facts support. By contrast, the mysticist will be expected to
observe various spiritual practices and beliefs that seem to not be
supported by reproducible evidence. In popular culture, we find this
divide typically expressed as the mutual exclusivity of science and
religion.

For the ancient Greeks those two magnitudes were not antithetical. The
more I think of the various tenets of Greek philosophy and religion,
the more I am convinced that there is consistency and continuity
between them. Sure, there are secondary differences, but the core
ideas are the same from the pre-Socratics to those who were active
during the pre-Christian Roman era, as well as in myths (the
theocratic Romans later shut down philosophical schools on the premise
that those were "idolatrous"---same for the Olympic games, the theatre
dramas, and the like).

To the Greeks, the cosmos is always there. It is not made by any one
god and no god is omnipotent. There is no universal tension between
good and evil: those magnitudes apply to a tiny subset of phenomena
which are human affairs. At the cosmic scale, we have admixture: a
tenet that is passed down to us through the proverb _«ουδέν κακόν
αμιγές καλού»_, which literally reads as "no bad unmixed with good"
or, more freely, "everything bad still has something good mixed into
it". And, of course, the inverse is true: everything good still has
something bad mixed into it.

The cosmos is one of admixture, else of consubstantial diversity. The
multitude of forms all share an underlying essence, which is
encapsulated in the word _logos_. It means ratio, pattern, reason (as
reasonableness and as cause), and word/language. Those all relate to
order, which is what everything in the cosmos exhibits.

This is why the Greek religion worships the continuum of human and
worldly multifacetedness, artistically expressed as polytheism: many
different facets of a greater oneness. The divine is at once singular
and of many forms, just how in the same human nature we find love and
hatred, courage and fear, reason and feeling, and all the rest.

How we reconcile those facets of our nature within the confines of
organised society is part of the cultural work we need to do. The
point though is that we cannot deny their joint presence and the
corresponding fact that no human is unidimensional. The ancient
Greeks, then, conceived of our experience in a nuanced way where there
are permutations between the analytical extremes.

The many which are at once singular/consubstantial is not a line of
thinking that died with the ancient Greek world. It survived to the
present era through Christian theology. This is none other than the
central doctrine of the trinity: the Three which are One; the One
which is Three. And if the One can be Three, it might as well manifest
as Four, such as through a Daughter or another Son. And if it can be
Four, then why not Twelve or a Million? There is no extra-divine
mechanism that enforces a fixed number of instantiations of the
divine. Not to run off on a tangent though. The point is that we have
in our culture the elements of a nuanced understanding of plurality
that does not challenge an underlying unity.

Couched in those terms, the Greek culture does not operate on the
basis of pitting opposites against each other. It rather acknowledges
their joint presence and teaches a balanced lifestyle that at once
allows the various facets of our being to be expressed in the right
context while ensuring none of them overpowers the rest. The
primordial Delphic maxim of _«μηδέν άγαν»_ (nothing in excess; nothing
led away from the moderate path) is not about complete suppression of
some perceived inherent malice/sin, for there is no such thing (per
the cosmic admixture). Put simply, an extremely rationalist person is
lacking in moderation as they are not cultivating their emotional
capacity. Someone who spends all their day at the gym lacks moderation
for not dedicating enough time to spiritual matters. And so on.

It is in this light that I dismiss the premise of German thinkers of
modernity about the putative contradiction between the Apollonian and
Dionysian propensities. Apollon and Dionysos are two consubstantial
gods in whose image we identify archetypes that encapsulate aspects of
human nature (and the world at-large). In the names of those two gods,
the poet discerns patterns that are made manifest in the cosmos and
which can---and do---coexist in the same person and/or in society as a
whole. It is entirely possible to, say, be disciplined and harmonious
(Apollon) while being ready to experience a special event, like a
festival, wholeheartedly (Dionysos). This is the whole point of
polytheism, as the non-contradiction between the various facets of our
being. It then comes down to moderation. Those who see Apollon and
Dionysos as necessary opposites are thus missing the point entirely.

This is not to argue that we should hold the same religious beliefs as
the ancients. I am not religious myself. What I find in the Greek
religion and in the philosophy it allowed to flourish in its midst is
a set of tenets, thoughts, and hypotheses that make sense to me. I do
consider religion a useful tool for popularising certain practical
teachings and for providing a framework for our communal experience. I
also appreciate the artistic as well as communicative value of
mythology, due to how it can capture profound insights and give them
strong mnemonic value without delving into boring technicalities. I
am, nevertheless, of the view that we humans define god as the
overarching narrative of our worldview. It is not a fact of nature
that, e.g., Athena dresses as a warrior. People just thought this
would be a good idea in an attempt to convey certain closely related
concepts. Whether anyone is right or wrong is part of our ongoing
efforts to understand our world and ourselves better.

To this end, what Platon believed is the mainstream ancient Greek
thought.

Taking a step back, I find it strange how a philosopher would limit
their outlook to a neatly defined "-ism". Not just for a monumental
historical figure like Platon, but even for ordinary friends of wisdom
such as myself. If your lifestyle qua philosopher revolves around
dubitativeness and inquisitiveness, then my understanding is that you
are, in principle, willing to entertain even those claims that seem
far removed from your established corpus of work. I understand the
practical constraint of not having enough resources to explore every
theme, but I am here thinking about one's attitude: a philosopher will
consider every position on its own merits and treat it fairly. We
still have opinions and are wrong about things, though we at least try
to have a rounded understanding of the matter at hand and are prepared
to change our mind accordingly.

My personal journey as a philosopher has also made me appreciate how
we are more than just rational agents. There were times when I
operated on the basis of faith, or intuition, or "gut feeling", or
however we call that which we experience beyond the confines of
verifiable evidence. When I had a strong resonance with something,
when I could know it once I had experienced it, I was convinced that
reason alone was insufficient. I thus broke the rationalist mould that
my university education put me in.

For me, philosophy was not---and is not---an academic project but an
epiphany of a different life characterised by lightness. It is about
accepting who I am as a human in my multifacetedness and not worry
about appearing as something else. This is a life of honesty and its
concomitant simplicity.

Those who limit their thinking to rationality, such as the average
scientist, do it by reducing their human experience to one of its
facets for a very narrowly defined end. They can only do so in certain
contexts, while their nature still contains all the non-rational
parts. The rationalist is not a rationalist throughout. Those people
still have emotions and biases, even though they pretend otherwise. As
such, the scientific enterprise is lauded as an unrealistically high
achievement of pristine rationality, when its day-to-day realities are
much more messy.

On the topic of the mysteries at Eleusina, or mysteries in general, we
know that words like "mystic", "mysterious", "mystical", and
"mystique" all are Greek in origin and relate to the Greek word for
"initiation" (μύηση). Something mysterious is not secretive or
inscrutable per se: we simply cannot penetrate its true meaning
without the requisite training (or ritual initiation) and so it
appears to us as incomprehensible. Hence the common understanding of
something being a mystery to us.

Mysteries are not inherently religious, as any body of knowledge will
seem alien to those who have not trained to understand it. Put your
average non-technical fellow in front of a computer program's source
code, for example, and behold what something mysterious looks like to
an outsider (i.e. to the uninitiated).

I do not know if the Eleusinian mysteries had anything special to
them, because I do not have enough information to judge for myself. I
can infer though that they were at odds with the worldview of the
Roman emperors who turned their empire into an intolerant theocracy
and banished all ancient wisdom in the process.

The morale of Platon's stance on mysticism is that we should not be
dogmatic. The philosopher is open-minded to the best of their
abilities and the most excellent societies in outlook are those that
genuinely tolerate (i.e. not in the form of political correctness) the
person's need to ask difficult questions and entertain alternative
answers.
