---
title: "The music all around"
excerpt: "An entry from my journal about how I stopped listening to music as much as I did and why enjoy nature instead."
---

The following comes from my journal.

* * *

I was checking my music collection the other day to confirm that my
backups are working. I noticed the folder for the artist "Atra
Aeterna", which brought back memories... This is abstract electronic
music. Close to ten years ago, I used to listen to it for hours on
end, exploring its otherworldly soundscapes while trying new things
with the computer. I no longer listen to it, even though I think of it
fondly. "Why?" I wondered and this prompted me to record these
thoughts.

My music tastes have become less abstract over the years. I prefer
songs that have lyrics and listen to Greek music---something I did not
do in my teens and early adulthood, for example. The human element
feels more proximate now. This coincides with my change of routines. I
have consistent themes in my life, such as the coaching work I do, and
the Emacs packages I maintain. My philosophy has also become more
practical, at least the way I formulate and communicate my thoughts,
even though it is still rooted in the highly abstract concepts I
developed in the past. The language I use is simpler too. I will write
the occasional long and complex sentence, sure! Though I largely am
easy-to-follow (well, at least compared to my earlier works). Now my
words are not impressive in themselves: they are ordinary and have
nothing "intellectual" about them. Their quality is more subtle: it is
the clarity of thought that runs through them.

Clear thinking is when we establish a connection between abstract
themes and everyday phenomena. I can talk about something, like making
bread, and still communicate lessons for life that have nothing to do
with bread-making per se. It does not need to be pompous and
professorial. The style does not shout "hey, this is philosophical
palaver" and does not call attention to itself. No! It gets the point
across like a bartender serving a glass of water to the drunks. I
remember when I used to do that in the early morning hours to those
who would ask for one last strong spirit before I would shut down
shop. They did not need another round. Only water would save them from
the inevitable collapse. "Save it for tomorrow mate; for there to be a
tomorrow." and I would give them the glass with the water. From the
perspective of the customer, there is nothing fancy in a glass of
water, certainly not compared to the exotic cocktails the bartender
could have prepared. Even the name is bland when you compare it to
the likes of "Sex on the Beach." Yet water revitalises us, even if
we do not always appreciate it in the heat of the moment.

Here, I did it again: what we need as opposed to what we want. Back to
my point about clear thinking. The recipient of the message I convey
eventually notices its profundity: the sentences are simple, not
simplistic. At least such is my self-impression, from serving drinks,
to communicating thoughts. What matters to me is that this is
happening organically. I am not trying to force things to be a certain
way. The greatest mistake is to find some "-ism" that finds currency
among intellectuals and identify with it. I am not trying to be an
"-ist". Things just happen. I go with the flow and try to express
myself in honesty. It is why I am writing this, after all: to reflect
on the "why?" I stopped listening to Atra Aeterna. Let the academics
figure out the "-isms" and let me do what I must.

The truth is that I have limited the total amount of time I spend with
multimedia in general. I rarely watch videos (including my own) and
listen to music only when I truly feel like it. Whereas I used to
passively consume content from audio or video files. There would
always be some noise in the background. "Noise" is the correct term,
as the material was not at the centre of my attention. Perhaps I
needed the stimulus as I was the product of city life. In the urban
centres we are near constantly at the receiving end of intense sensory
inputs. Think of the cars racing up and down the street. Everything is
so fast. It feels unsettling when you compare it to how serene a
natural scene is. The city lights and the boisterous streets, the
multitude of mouthwatering (and addictive sugary/salty/greasy) tastes
at every corner... We are used to the fast pace and high intensity. It
happens every single day and is our normal level.

Passive stimuli, then, like the abstract music in the background, all
those "daba duba" rhythms that we maintain in the periphery of our
senses, are a reflection of our environmental conditioning. I must
have needed something to be there as I was not used to the relative
silence and perceived stasis. This is like how I used to feel when I
cut back on salt and sugar decades ago: at first, even food with some
salt would feel unsalted. Same idea with every stimulus. When we are
used to the higher threshold, anything below it neither triggers nor
fulfils us.

Having lived away from busy built-up areas for years, I notice how
much I have changed physically. I am calmer as my body is less tense.
The pace is slower. My tastes are more nuanced and I feel lighter.
Life is almost effortless, despite considerable challenges (e.g. the
hut's leaking roof and walls, limited electricity, etc.). Whatever
material constraints are still there, though I feel that I always
start from my position of calmness. I am composed and do not feel
disturbance. There is a mental or spiritual side to this, as I think
things through with rigour and am highly disciplined, though I am now
interested in the underlying physiology of my experience. If the city
dweller is the product of their environment, then so are my mountains
remaking me.

The move to the hut is the latest stage in this transformation of
mine. I live close to a river and a stream. The area is full of birds
of all kinds. From the small ones, to predators like owls and eagles.
Black snakes, which are benign for humans, live in the perimeter of my
house. They keep rodent populations in check, while they drive away
the poisonous/lethal vipers. I consider these black snakes my
guardians: their presence is reassuring. It does not stop there
though. Frogs stay close to the waters. Lots of them! They keep
producing their distinctive melodies. And I lost count of how many
different types of plant are in my immediate vicinity. There is
diversity from one end to the other. Life everlasting. I have learnt
to pay more attention to the details. I am attuned to them. Like with
the sound of cane leaves against the gentle breeze... It is barely
noticeable but---oh my!---how beautiful it is. I believe previous
versions of me would have missed this entirely or, at least, not
appreciate it the way I do.

I no longer have music playing in the background. If I do listen to
anything, I actually pay attention to it. As the days go by, I find
myself doing this less frequently. The frogs, the birds, the trees...
I am in their company now. Calm and easygoing, while I appreciate the
inherent beauty of this world. Why renounce the world or try to escape
from it, when we are born with the innate faculty of aesthetics? Why
must I try to reason away this spontaneous sense of awe? And why
consider reason the sole conduit to the truth? Rather, we can take a
step back from the busy routines that limit our perspective. In the
open vistas we do not just find breathtaking landscapes, but also the
inspiration to imagine our self beyond the narrow confines of our
preconceived notions.

I am changing to be more natural. Hidden in the open, as with all that
is nuanced. Yet I retain my sociability and previous skills. There is
no binary here. My conscience is expanding to cover more of the cosmic
continuum. Perhaps I have developed another layer without undoing the
previous ones. There is no media player running in the background. I
am ready to appreciate the music that environs me.
