---
title: "Thoughts on a personality test I did"
excerpt: "Commentary on a personality test I did. It is interesting, but I am sceptical about it."
---

I recently took a personality test. It applies the "Big Five"
methodology. This is a premium service, but I will not provide details
in the interest of privacy. The results are broadly in line with what
I already knew, namely:

1. **Predominantly rational:** exceptionally low agreeableness, which
   is the trait that covers aspects of compassion and politeness.
2. **Moderately introverted:** slightly below average extraversion,
   which is the trait that covers aspects of enthusiasm and
   assertiveness.
3. **Industrious but not perfectionist:** high conscientiousness,
   which is the trait that covers aspects of industriousness and
   orderliness.
4. **Open-minded but not too unconventional:** high openness, which is
   the trait that covers aspects of intellect and aesthetics.
5. **Emotionally stable and predictable:** exceptionally low
   neuroticism, which is the trait that covers aspects of withdrawal
   and volatility.

Still, there is plenty of room for interpretation and scepticism.

## The character of a working-line dog breed

One score that is surprising if left unexplained is that of
agreeableness. This is the trait that encompasses characteristics of
compassion and politeness. While I am on the lower end on both, I
think the test does not---and perhaps cannot---capture nuanced points.
My disposition is akin to that of a guard dog: I am hostile to
offenders and will stand my ground, cautious in the face of radical
uncertainty, not too quick to make the first move, and unequivocally
loyal towards those I care about. Like a dog, I am not particularly
shy, though I do know when to remain silent and when to speak my mind.

As with all of these traits, they have to be understood in relation to
each other. For instance, my low agreeableness must be framed in light
of my moderate extraversion. Because I am perfectly content with being
alone, I meed more time to connect with people and thus appear more
distant/cold to those who do not know me. Though I do eventually
connect with them deeply. I am not stern, as I enjoy joking and making
others laugh (I am open with those I know, as you would expect from
the aforementioned).

My conscientiousness is a mixture of super high industriousness and
very low orderliness. This means that I am not judgemental despite my
work ethic. I tolerate practically everything and do not get upset if
things are not the way I want. Adding the super low neuroticism into
the mix (thick-skinned and emotionally predictable), I am as easygoing
as it gets which, I think, does not make me "cold" but rather "aloof".

## Enthusiastic only for what I care about

The extraversion trait is a curious case. My enthusiasm score is on
the lower end which, again, is like how a dog takes time to warm up to
strangers. But my assertiveness is high. I am not especially
argumentative in one-to-one exchanges because of my dubitative and
inquisitive philosophical outlook. I am content to change my mind when
faced with cogent counter arguments, though I will not do it just to
please someone (also reflected as low agreeableness). Perhaps this is
why the assertiveness is high: one will have to make a compelling case
to persuade me.

Enthusiasm is a nuanced concept. I consider myself highly enthusiastic
about the things I care about. For example, I have been publishing
consistently on my website since 2011---I enjoy it! Though I do indeed
have a hard time getting excited about something I find dull or which
is forced upon me. This is why I was not good at school: I was
daydreaming about football and other adventures, which I did excel at,
but could not be bothered to parrot whatever boring nonsense they gave
us for homework. When I got into college, which I did on my own
accord, working and paying for it, I became passionate about my
studies and got excellent grades. This is a clear pattern of being
eclectic with my enthusiasm: it is not for every thing/one, but once
it is there, it is unflinching.

In light of my high assertiveness and low orderliness (more on that
below), this selective enthusiasm helps explain why I do not care
about a glittering career, a person's social standing, or authority in
general. I respect those who earn it with their deeds and value honour
in a person above everything else.

Since I mentioned school, I am reminded of an instance that shows my
assertive side which, combined with low agreeableness, makes me
independent albeit not contrarian. In my mother tongue, modern Greek,
it is common to use archaic forms of words. There is no ambiguity:
everyone understands exactly what you are saying (an example for Greek
speakers: _Î· Ï€ÏŒÎ»Î·, Ï„Î·Ï‚ Ï€ÏŒÎ»ÎµÏ‰Ï‚_ instead of _Î· Ï€ÏŒÎ»Î·, Ï„Î·Ï‚ Ï€ÏŒÎ»Î·Ï‚_). I once
used such a form without thinking about it in the literature class,
which the ever-pedantic teacher marked as a mistake. I defended my
choice, explaining that I was justified because we employ those forms
in the vernacular, providing examples in the process. The teacher
dismissed my argument on the parochial premise that those are still
not "modern Greek". They then appealed to their authority and chose
not to revise my score. I was not convinced...

## When you mix an ant with a grasshopper

The conscientiousness part is as expected, though I think the low
orderliness score is misleading if seen in isolation. I am not a messy
person in any sense: not physically, nor in terms of my work. I
actually am a minimalist and prefer to remove clutter where possible.
I am generally careful and consistent in my methods. Though I do not
worry if things are not the way I want them and am not obsessive about
minimalism: a messy desk does not bother me. I would thus describe
myself as "orderly in general" but also "nonchalant". These sound
mutually exclusive, though they are not: I take good care about the
things I control but do not get upset if the prevailing conditions do
not go my way or, generally, if I have to adapt to evolving states of
affairs. Perhaps, then, a better description is "stable basis, varied
ways". This is consistent with my exceptionally low neuroticism, i.e.
I am not prone to negative emotions.

I think the high work ethic is perhaps the single most noticeable
feature I have. Just do a cursory search on this website to notice how
frequently and how much I publish, for example. And then consider that
this is something I do on the side, usually after a long day of
work... However, I am not a workaholic. Greeks never miss an
opportunity to enjoy their _tavli_ with _cafÃ© frappÃ©_ in hand, after
all. ðŸ™ƒ Well, not exactly what I do though I am taking breaks and have
plenty of time for relaxation.

Continuing with the theme of being easygoing, I do not expect anyone
to keep apace with me: I neither judge them, nor demand from them to
raise their standard. I am industrious simply because it is fun for me
(there is practical value as well, but I would not do it if it was not
exciting). Again, this nuanced point about enthusiasm... I am highly
competitive with myself: I try to push the boundaries and strongly
prefer action to the alternative of "just chill". I would rather go
for a long walk than watch a movie, for example, not out of some
ideological opposition to cinema but simply because it does not appeal
to me. We return to the analogy of the working-line dog breed once
more: a police canine will become depressed if it is forced into a
sedentary lifestyle, but let it in on the action and it thrives.

## Ideas and actions are good

My openness score shows that I am a person of ideas but I am not going
too far with them. This is evident in my intellectual side which,
nonetheless, is not too abstract. I consider my philosophy largely
practical and I try to explain concepts in a way that is relatable. I
also program for leisure (lots of packages for Emacs, for instance),
which is a continuation of this "yes to ideas; yes to applications"
theme. I still am not the true engineer type, as I find fulfilment in
the openendedness of philosophical contemplation.

The trait of openness covers the intellect and aesthetics. The former
is not to be confused with intelligence: it is about whether a person
is drawn to concepts rather than things. My intellect score is very
high but my aesthetics are average. This may explain why I am
conventional in many ways. For example, my clothes tend to be simple
(those which are fancier are gifts), I have never had a piercing, do
not have tattoos, never dyed my hair, did not try smoking, and,
generally did not do anything that looks unconventional or remotely
edgy. (I am totally okay with all of these, by the way, but do not see
any reason to try them myself---again, the easygoing, non-judgemental
part).

My average score on aesthetics does seem odd though if seen in
isolation. I think of myself as sensitive to art and natural beauty in
general. I even write poetry, though I admit it is not of the overtly
emotional sort. What is clear, however, is that I do not feel the need
to show an artistic flair, especially not to draw attention to myself
through it (which makes sense once we factor in the below average
extraversion). Though I agree that it cannot be too high because if I
was given the choice to, say, play the guitar or participate in a
football match I would pick the latter 100% of the time. Same for
everything I like, actually, hence why I never tried to learn music,
do painting, become an actor, join a dancing club...

Perhaps my score on aesthetics would be much higher if they were
asking about natural scenes: my heart skips a beat when I catch the
sunset, encounter an eagle, and the like. To me, these belong to the
category of aesthetic experiences (with awe being spiritual), although
they are not "art". Limiting aesthetics to what humans produce is
bound to completely miss the kind of subtlety I care about, while it
will overestimate my dislike for kitsch.

## What you see is what you get

Neuroticism as a concept was the one I was not sure about. It sounded
vague to me. This is the way a person reacts to negative emotions
and/or stressful situations. It thus covers aspects of withdrawal and
volatility. I am exceptionally low on these metrics, meaning that I do
not withdraw into my own shell and I am emotionally stable (not angry,
upset, agitated). Additionally, I am patient, do not hold grudges,
take no offence, and do not worry even about things that can be
dangerous.

A few days ago, I was in a video call when a viper moved along the
floor in my room (there are both venomous and non-venomous snakes
around my hut). I learnt after the fact that there was a small opening
below my door, which must be where the snake got in. Atlas, one of my
two dogs, immediately attacked and ultimately neutralised the snake. I
got up right away and calmly contained the serpent with a piece of
cloth while it was still moving. I took it outside and then I went
back to my call as if nothing had happened.

This has been the norm in my activities (first time I got up so close
to a venomous snake though). I have faced difficult situations but
coped with them while keeping my cool. A common case is with
emergencies, like when I saved a neighbour's dog from poisoning by
first making it vomit and then administering a vaccine I had in store
for my own dog. I recently did something similar when I patched the
bleeding ear of a stray dog, while others were crying about whether it
would survive the night (it is doing well). I cannot tell how much of
this is down to personality, experience, or philosophical training,
though I remember having this trait to some degree from a young age.

I did, nonetheless, go through a period of depression during the
previous decade. This is something I have thought about before: why
would it happen to me, given my stable temperament? My best guess is
that I went through that phase of doubt, disappointment,
powerlessness, and self-loathing because I was in an environment that
ran counter to my nature, combined with my extremely precarious
financial situation at the time that was bringing into question my
basic sense of safety. Basically, I was a wild animal that had to act
like a house cat, desperate for food but with no outlet for its
hunting drive. This was all gone once I moved to the mountains. I
rediscovered myself and even gained insights into aspects of selfhood
that were once obscure to me.

## Informative but easy to mislead

I expect every self-respecting scientist to admit that these tests
are, at best, a thumbnail sketch of what a person is. They do not
capture the finer points and leave plenty of room for interpretation.
If I were to proclaim "hay, I rank low in terms of compassion" that
would make me sound like some kind of a robot when in reality I am
friendly. Similarly, if I remark that I am super industrious this can
give a sense of being toxic with how I expect others to behave when in
actuality I never think in terms of one-size-fits-all and do not feel
the need to prove anything to anyone. The way I see it, I am playing
around out of sheer enthusiasm.

Furthermore, I am concerned that a report like this may make someone
think of their self as not malleable. Especially if they are
introduced to it early in life. I would rather have people develop
organically than think of themselves in terms of stereotypes like "I
am an introvert" and try to explain everything in those terms. Even
the most accurate findings will give us about a statistical figment
that is decoupled from the particularities of a person's experience.
Every data point needs to be contextualised to better explain the
"why" or "how" of phenomena, as well as to hint at the known unknowns
involved.

There is a more abstract hesitation I have with this test, which is
that we cannot conduct experiments about humans in vitro. The people
we study are always culturally informed and determined in vivo. I
cannot know, for example, whether my unruliness is due to my peculiar
nature or the fact that Greeks have a long history of being suspicious
of authority (I would argue it goes back to ancient Greece, before the
advent of democracy, but I will not digress)? How much, then, is my
nature's contribution despite the environing cultural milieu and how
much is because of it? I cannot run the tests again with me outside of
the specifics of my case, so there is no point in arguing the
counterfactual. All I can note is that I have my reservations. Adding
factors such as upbringing, education, and social expectations will
only further reinforce my scepticism.

Overall, I am happy to have taken this test. It did not tell me
something new about myself, although it gave me new concepts to think
about.
