---
title: "The spirit under the moonlight"
excerpt: "Entry from my journal where I write about the awe of being in nature."
---

The following is an entry from my journal.

* * *

I just got back from a long walk with the dogs. Local time is a few
minutes past 9 PM. The temperature is low, though I am feeling warm
right now. We are at a phase in the month where the mooning is
growing. There is only a sliver of it that is visible in the sky. It
will keep growing until it appears full. At least in my area, I can
tell when the moon is full even without paying close attention to its
shape, based solely on its position during sunset. The moon is full
when it rises from the east while the sun sets in the west. You get to
experience the moonrise in close succession to the sunset. It is early
in the night, yet the moon is already close to where the sun is
setting. This alone tells me that we need several nights before we get
to the full moon.

Living in the mountains imposes some practical constraints, though it
has the upside of experiencing the beauty of the world, potentially
without filters and distractions. Just as I observe the moon, I notice
the patterns in the behaviour of plants and birds. Each has its
particularities yet there also is a unity to all of them. There is
something there that underpins everything, such that a human is more
than an amalgamation of flesh and bone, a plant is greater than wood
and leaves combined, and so on.

I have said many times that I am not a religious person. Some mistake
this to mean that I am an atheist or, at least, that I have no
interest in spiritual matters. I think those are not the same thing. I
know many religious people who I would not consider spiritual and the
inverse. What I think of as the spirit is the facet of our being which
is distinct from rationality, emotions, aesthetic faculties, and
bodily functions or desires. It is not greater than them, as they all
are part of the same system and can only be understood through it (to
have a spiritual experience, I do it in my embodied version as a human
and I cannot know for sure if there is anything else and how that is).
Describing the spirit through this entry can only be done with words,
which will have to be reasonable and must thus reduce the spiritual
facet into a rational proposition. I will then limit myself to what a
rationalist will find unsatisfying: "you know it when you feel it".

To me, awe is such a case. I walk up the mountain, it is cold and
mostly dark, until I reach the top. From there I observe the open
vistas. There is moonlight all around me and I can hear the crickets,
the night birds, and the frogs singing in concert. All I can sense in
those moments is that I am being touched by something greater than me.
The fundamental tension in our life is, I think, between our natural
egocentism or subjectivity and the fact of our contextualised
presence. As a conscious person, I see the world through my
perspective, yet I know all too well that the world precedes me,
environs me, and will outlast me. As such, I believe that
"enlightenment" is when we reach a point of alignment and harmony
between the ego and its environment, the part and the whole. This is
equanimity to me, the capacity to not be disturbed by thoughts or
phenomena which would otherwise blind you to your place in the cosmos.

I am aware that I do not have all the answers and am fine with not
having them. What I can do is work with what is available to me, as
faculties of sense, intellect, aesthetics, and as this spiritual
dimension. There is a present here in which I have presence. I am yet
another form of life like all others and there is no obvious ranking
among us. I am but a tiny spec in an infinite universe and I am
limited in my capacity to provide definitive proof about anything
(perhaps beyond the everyday matters).

Still, these walks are fulfilling me. Through awesome events, I am
being brought down to earth to be made more humble in realising how
all of us, forms of life in a cosmic continuum of life, have something
in common. If anybody cares to know, I am happy to tell them about
these moments. I do not do it because I think I have the answers, but
because of another basic capacity of our species: the joy of sharing,
which is the essence of every community we can ever have.

Our joy while dealing with other people is when we experience
something of a shared interest together. We may play a game, sing a
song, hike in the mountains, do some pair programming, and so on. It
does not matter what it is so long as we are jointly and honestly
participating in the experience. Here, again, I discern this same
dynamic of the part and whole, now in a social setting of the
individual and its social milieu. Just how we find a balance with the
world at-large, participation in a community presupposes a diminution
of each ego. When we sing together, for example, we do not try to
out-compete each other. Otherwise, we are not really singing, but
doing a performance to ultimately overpower the others. Even if it is
superficially the same, we can tell it is not really about the joy of
sharing. It is the same with the cosmos, if I am acknowledging that I
am part of the whole, I am necessarily admitting that I am not
outstanding or special in any way.

Sometimes, I have people ask me about the specific school of thought I
subscribe to. To my knowledge, the most correct answer is "none". This
is because I am not interested in debating for the sake of winning any
argument. I do not do philosophy to be perceived as smart, thoughtful,
and erudite. The notion of "being up to date with the literature" does
not appeal to me. I do not care about attending conferences, being
famous, becoming rich, etc. Those will likely distract me from finding
peace. All I care about is to develop the tools that let me cut
through all the noise of our civilisation to find the subtle qualities
of the world: they are always there, but we are too busy to pay
attention to them; perhaps too noisy and too full of ourselves to
listen to the crickets.

When I experience the moonlight in the mountains, I know that it is
not some "spectacular show", like what we are all used to. I will not
read about it in the gossip column of some magazine, it will not be
reported in the news, nor will it be debated among the leading
intellectuals of our era. It is, nonetheless, a moment that inspires
awe and contemplation, and thus reminds me to be simple. If I share
this, it is because there may be others who feel the same way and who
do not have a need to engage in ideological arguments about whose
"-ism" is the best. They all are a distraction, as far as I am
concerned, because they all put rationality above the spirit. When you
can connect with your environment, you feel content.
