---
title: 'Ten years of protesilaos.com'
excerpt: 'Information on my website turning ten years old.'
---
On 2011-02-08 I published my first essay on protesilaos.com: _"The Theory
underpinning the Euro"_, which was a take on optimal currency areas.  At
the time I was a Bachelor's student in European Politics, Economics, and
Law.  That post was the first in a multi-year long series of articles on
the European Union.

In those ten years I have published over 1 million words on this website
(1.120.963 to be precise).  This, of course, does not count private
email exchanges nor all other important discussions or contributions I
have made in written form, while it greatly underestimates the
information I share through video files.

Furthermore, that number fails to account for my programming endeavours,
as it does not capture the effort that goes into reading, writing,
editing code.  Plus, counting words in code is not particularly
insightful, unless it pertains to the concomitant documentation.  For an
indication of the latter case, consider that my "dotemacs" (the literate
program for my GNU Emacs configuration) is well over 50.000 words long
in its current state with the actual figure getting close to double that
once we add all files that together make up my private Emacs setup.
While the official manual of my Modus themes, an otherwise technical and
straightforward document, exceeds 17.000 words.  Other projects of mine
are accompanied by comprehensive commentary of this sort, none of which
is included in that +1mil sum.

At any rate, this is the command I used on my GNU/Linux computer.  It
goes through all markdown-formatted files in the directories ("folders")
that contain my writings, returns a word count for each item, while also
calculating the sum, and prints the latter.

```sh
~/Git/Projects/protlab $ find . -type f -iname "*.md" -exec wc -w {} + | tail -1
1120963 total
```

## The quest for clarity

Quantity is not a measure of quality, while verbosity is not my goal.  I
am interested in clarity.  For instance, my latest essay about politics,
[On platformarchs, the demi-state, and
deplatforming](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2021-01-26-platformarchs-demistate-deplatforming/)
(2021-01-26) tackles current events while framing them in terms of their
wider historical and ideological context.  The article is a bit less
than 2000 words long, yet it presents every essential point about the
subject and elucidates my thesis.  A chronicler of ongoing phenomena
could easily clock in at 20.000 words within the span of a few days or
weeks, all while wasting their time on minutia and losing sight of the
constants.

Emphasis on the quantity of output can lead to false findings.  My
[Notes on Rules](https://protesilaos.com/notes-on-rules) (2020-07-01) is
a book that consists of aphorisms.  It is an exercise in brevity, in
that it consists of ~5700 words despite the broad scope of its topic.
How about [Notes on
Simplicity](https://protesilaos.com/notes-simplicity) (2019-06-22),
which is less than 800 words long?  Both express my thoughts and I feel
that they need no further work to meet their telos.  They are complete.

## A brief history of protesilaos.com

+ This website started out as a blog on Blogger.  Virtually all of my
  writings were about EU politics and economics.

+ In 2013 I migrated to a self-hosted Wordpress installation while the
  focus of the blog started shifting towards philosophy.  Though
  politics was still a large part of it.

+ In 2016 the website evolved into a statically generated set of files.
  This marked the year I first ventured into coding and started learning
  about free software and GNU/Linux.  My writings thus expanded into
  relevant areas, while I gradually shifted away from EU-specific
  affairs in my political writings.
  
+ In 2019 I switched to using Emacs as my main computing environment.
  More than 60 videos have been produced in the meantime, many of which
  are over 30 minutes long.
  
All this information is organised by content type.

## The next decade of protesilaos.com

I am not slowing down on what I publish on this website.  My future
trajectory and the next ten years of protesilaos.com remain unknown.
What I can promise is that I will continue publishing writings or videos
on philosophy, politics, coding.

## Doing philosophy

_Since we are here_...

In retrospect, it is clear that I was never meant to be an academic in
any of the fields I took formal studies in, nor become an apparatchik in
some political party or bureaucracy.  My tendency to philosophise was
evident in those earlier writings, even though it was woven together
with otherwise technical insights on current affairs.

A university professor who had noticed a pattern of theorising in the
study material I would supply had warned me that incomplete bibliography
would result in a 5% reduction from the total grade.  _"What references
do you expect?"_ I thought to myself, _"I am the authority"_...  So I
replied that my homework would still qualify for an A, despite the
penalty.

This was not me being rude or arrogant.  False modesty and etiquette
should not be mistaken for humility.  I was merely expressing my honest
intent to not pretend that I was echoing some undisputed source of truth
on the matter: if I am wrong, address the point, not the formalities,
not the superficialities.

The act of publishing my writings follows this exact principle.  It is
about standing by one's words and being prepared to face the
consequences.  These are ideas that have been fleshed out in [The
Dialectician's Ethos](https://protesilaos.com/ethos-dialectic/)
(2020-09-30), among others.

Doing philosophy is not a career choice: you cannot "just do it"---you
are born with it, in the same way an Olympic athlete is endowed with the
requisite physical abilities and talents to become a competitor in their
field.  And the like for all areas of specialisation and sophistication.
Commitment can only refine and improve upon the end product of one's
innate strengths and inclinations.  It does not outright engender them.
No amount of training, formal education and certificates will make you a
good philosopher, painter, footballer, listener, artisan, etc. if you
are not already disposed for it.

I am a philosopher.  This is just my natural propensity towards a field
of interest, which comes with its pros and inescapable cons.

Philosophy has, in fact, hampered my EU-related efforts from yester
years and catalysed my ultimate failure to pursue a successful career in
that field.  I could have done it, given that I had gotten a job at the
European Parliament even before I had finalised my studies (the last 6
months were carried out remotely from Brussels).  But I eventually quit
after realising the disconnect between my intellectual pursuits and the
quotidian reality of cutthroat politics.

Philosophy also limits my social life, making me a recluse even though I
am friendly and easy-going.  It has become increasingly difficult to
hold a discussion with someone, as I can no longer tolerate gossip and
irrelevant details, while the other party has no interest in my
musings.  Naturally!

Finally, philosophy does not pay the bills.  Someone might ask for my
advice and my insights might change their perspective on things,
including the possibility of altering their course in life.  Yet this is
not a good that one can quantify and exchange in some transaction.  I
cannot price it hourly or per kilo: each case differs, while those who
do pay for counselling have something specific in mind for which there
already exist specialists.  _Here, have total creative freedom to speak
your mind, and I will reward you with a wage_.  That is a thought that
no employer in my life ever implemented, assuming they did entertain it.

So I am a farmer and do whatever part-time job comes my way...
