---
title: 'Sovereignty and debt in the modern era'
subtitle: 'Independence and self-determination come first'
excerpt: 'The economic and political realities of our time force us to rethink the principles that guide our world.'
redirect_from:
  - /2018/12/04/sovereignty-debt-modern-era/
---

We have gone through several years of economic crisis.  The chilling
effects are still felt across the population, especially those on the
lower end of the income distribution.  The debt hangover will persist
for decades to come, limiting the capacity of governments to meet social
needs.  Meanwhile, the relocation of educated people in search for
stable employment—brain drain—leads to a permanent loss for the country
of origin.

Europe's response to its sovereign debt crisis was to protect the
interests of international lenders over those of public borrowers.
Rather than cancel debt, the establishment preferred to force policies
of impoverishment on the population.

## False ethics, pernicious politics

Countries should pay their debt in full out of some misguided notion of
necessary punishment.  Such is the narrative concealing the promotion of
oligopolistic interests.  Punitive ethics and capitalist machinations
are masked by long _economistic_ commentaries about the pressing need to
avoid 'moral hazard'.  This is the concept where doing something,
including if it is for the general good, can create a bad precedent for
others to exploit.  It produces incentives that are not aligned with the
current expectations regarding the settlement of debts.

Yet it is never noted that the 'bad precedent' is only detrimental to
reckless creditors and greedy financiers.  What about the upsides of
avoiding the bondage of interest, of eliminating debt prisons, of not
forcing the degradation of public services and, ultimately, of not
undermining democratic institutions?

The euphemism is "austerity", but what was/is actually being implemented
is a pro-creditor agenda.  An upward distribution of wealth _and
control_.  This has nothing to do with some dubious virtue of frugality
and parsimony.  Learning to live with less is a myth that is being fed
to those who see the rich among them become ever-richer.

Whether there is some inherent good to a minimalist lifestyle is beyond
the point.  That is a matter of choice, not orders backed by threats by
some "troika" of unaccountable technocrats.

Inequality is on the rise.  What really is at stake though is a power
equilibrium within society and across countries, with creditors at the
epicentre.  The owning class has the means to consolidate its control
over all industries it operates in.  Hence the emergence of
mega-corporations with an international presence, who pay little to no
tax, and who manipulate markets by buying up other companies, start-ups,
former competitors.

This is not just a matter of degree of the poor becoming poorer and the
rich richer.  A new social order is in the making.  The super-rich
evolve into the modern equivalent of feudal lords.  They own or have
unencumbered access both to the relevant factors of production and the
political power to mould society in accordance with their economic
interests.  The rest are forced to conform under the pressures of
precarity and "emergency measures" imposed by complying rulers.

## Sovereignty must take precedence

Against this backdrop, policy-makers have seldom paused to think about
the overarching rules of the world order.  They have failed to question
the effects of the rising international plutocracy on the core
principles of statehood and sovereignty.  Instead, the public debate
continues to focus on the misinformed morality of the sanctity of debt,
with the corresponding duty to protect creditors from 'hazard'.

There is a trade-off involved.  Safeguarding the interests of creditors
comes at the cost of diminishing the independence of nations.  Any
decision should not only consider the needs of the creditors but also
those of the countries affected.

This is where the Westphalian conception of statehood reveals its
limitations.[^STSNS]  Our world differs profoundly from the one that
existed one, two, three centuries ago.  There was nothing akin to the
international financialised system we have today.  Corporations could
not siphon their profits to tax havens and engineer complex legal
schemes to erode their tax base, thus paying little to nothing.  There
were no bond markets for unscrupulous financiers to aggressively
speculate against a country's creditworthiness with the ulterior motive
of forcing a government to apply a certain regime of measures.

The Westphalian world view is one of symmetry.  It concerns relations
between states.  Whereas our time is characterised by asymmetry.
Certain private actors are simply too powerful.  They have the means to
force sovereign nations into submission.  They can escape taxation by
moving their money abroad.  They can put pressure on countries by
speculating against them.  They can employ an army of apologists, posing
as experts and ostensibly morally-neutral technocrats, who will forward
their public relations agenda by arguing for such misleading notions as
"moral hazard".

Underlying the policy-making inertia is a misunderstanding about
countries as persons.  The whole idea of applying inter-personal norms
to nations is riddled with fallacies.  It conflates micro- and macro-
economic spheres.  It assumes the homogeneity and uniformity of nations
and of national economies.  It reduces complex, multi-faceted issues to
a simplistic binary of reward and punishment, where there are no
collateral damages, longer-term implications, and inter-generational
injustices.

As such, it is considered morally permissible to curtail the
independence of nations in order to service their exorbitant debt
burdens.  This omits the crucial detail of the Westphalian order: the
personhood of nations/states only makes sense in a symmetric system
where nations/states are the units of all things related to politics and
will-formation.  In other words, personhood is not inherent to
nation/states, but a heuristic with which we can make sense of
international politics.

Whereas the modern era of the internationalised and financialised
economy has blurred the lines between the commercial and the political.
International lenders do have a political agenda which they forward
through their seemingly business-only decisions.  They know full well
which set of policies is aligned with their money-making schemes and who
are the politicians willing to do their bidding on the legislative and
policy-making fronts.  The idea that corporations only care about money
is overly simplistic.  Indeed, naive.

Overcoming such misconceptions means updating our understanding of
international norms.  We must move from the narrow conception of the
symmetrical order between state actors to the current reality of the
asymmetric world.  Applying the principles of independence and
self-determination thus requires us to look at the relationship between
public and private actors.

A country that is forced to service its debts at the expense of its
independence is, in fact, facing economic warfare.  Its sovereignty is
at risk, its institutions are deprived of their legitimacy to serve the
public interest.  Depending on the specifics of the case, the issue of
international debt is not just about the relationship between a public
actor and private lenders.  Rather, it is between the indebted state and
private interests that are intertwined with some other country's
stratagems.

## Consider the overarching framework

To this end, I encourage politicians to think about the bigger picture.
To avoid the pitfalls of punitive morality, to stop treating countries
as individuals, and to let go of the misbegotten notion that debt is
sacred.

We are at a historical crossroads.  Either we take pause and think of
our political, legal, economic, social structures anew, or we mindlessly
march to a new Dark Age; a new world where the vast majority of us
become serfs—even if seemingly middle class—to some corporate overlord,
some financial enabler or platform provider, who operates in between the
jurisdictions of states across the globe, reaping the rewards and
avoiding the consequences of their egregiously harmful conduct.


[^STSNS]:  See my book: [Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood](https://protesilaos.com/stsns/) (2018-03-29).
