---
title: 'Technocratic communism is not the answer'
excerpt: 'Mainstream leftists have not realised that gigantism is bad in itself.'
---

I read with great interest the December 27, 2019 _Project Syndicate_
column of Yanis Varoufakis, titled [Imagining a World Without
Capitalism](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/imagining-a-world-without-capitalism-by-yanis-varoufakis-2019-12).
While I think that Varoufakis' heart is in the right place, and his
critique of capitalism as essentially anti-market is spot on, I cannot
subscribe to his technocratic outlook.

What Varoufakis outlines as an alternative to the established order is
yet another form of gigantism.  It requires a massive, omnipotent state
apparatus that would need to have access to vast amounts of data in
order to perform the function of ironing out inequalities between
people.  The notion of a central bank overseeing everyone's income
implies that there must be commensurate checks in place: a counter-party
treasury, a government, a legislature…  A super-state, much like the
USA, Russia, China, and, increasingly, the EU.

What historical communism proved, what past and modern capitalism
confirms, and what leftists in the mould of Varoufakis blithely ignore,
is that the concentration of power is a source of mischief, abuse,
corruption, no matter the initial motives for gathering all ultimate
authority in a single locus.

Historical communism was enacted as yet another highly-stratified
imperium rather than a distributed network of communes.  It turned into
a totalitarian regime exactly because the only way to control every
aspect of life, in the name of the much-vaunted communal good, is to
create a robust hierarchy, with supreme authority trusted at the top.

Whether it is party apparatchiks, professional central bankers, or
ostensibly enlightened scientists in charge of managing everyone's life,
the underlying assumption is that gigantism is not bad per se.  It just
is a matter of changing the policies, not the state architecture.  This
is why today's leftists offer no sustainable solution to the problems of
our world.  They see the epiphenomena while ignoring the underlying
mechanics of institutionalised power.  Should they get things their way,
history will just repeat itself.

In the capitalist system we witness the symbiotic relationship between
the state and the capital owners who control critical infrastructure;
"platformarchs" as I call them.  This type of plutocracy maintains a
two-tier system that has nothing to do with the idealised free market of
competing agents over a level-playing field that is taught in economics
textbooks.  Platformarchs hold disproportionate power, which they use to
mould politics/law in their interests, to undermine their potential
competition, and to consolidate their {oligo,mono}-polistic status.  The
"free market" only exists in the half spaces left unoccupied by
platformarchs; the spaces where concentrated power is not [yet] focused
in.

This is not a decadent form of some true capitalism, a far cry from some
supposed golden age of free markets.  No, this is a necessary result of
the concentration of power: the intertwined agendas of economic and
political interests, the control over resources and its weaponisation as
an instrument for preserving the status quo.  Those who have power seek
to keep it and expand it.  Not controlling some aspect of life can
potentially lead to the undoing of the entire edifice.  It is why a
hierarchical system always has the tendency for absolutism (and why
modern representative democracies are, in fact, oligarchies).

Gigantism cannot be turned into some kind of benevolent totalitarianism.
That would require a technocratic elite that consists of purely
altruistic beings who only care about the common good, assuming there is
such a one-size-fits-all good to begin with.  We cannot expect such an
exalted, omniscient class to come to the fore—and to always be there in
the long term—when it is highly unlikely to ever meet a single human who
is perfectly non-egoistic.  Put bluntly, it is naive to expect people in
power to consistently behave unlike their nature and their role.

The other major problem of gigantism is that it can only be instituted
in opposition to organic societies; "organic" in the sense of naturally
exhibiting solidarity between their members.  Organic societies are
families and small communities.  The opposite of what an empire is all
about.  Gigantism cannot be communitarian because it would then have to
deny itself of the power over those communities.

When we think about alternatives we should always prefer the theory that
makes the fewer assumptions about human nature.  Do not base your ideas
on the presence of the perfect moral agent.  Your endeavour is bound to
fail miserably.  Instead work with the knowledge we have about the
imperfect people we all are.  Take it as a given that there will be
competing forces, recognise that corruption and power go hand-in-hand,
and do not expect the human kind to behave much differently than other
pack animals (the idea that humans are higher beings is [another hubris
of ours](https://protesilaos.com/hubris/), a form of anthropocentrism).

I hold that the opposition to capitalism must also assume the form of a
radical departure from gigantism.  That is the constant, the historical
midpoint.  Whereas capitalism is just its current emanation, with
actualised communism being another one.  We must turn our attention to
organic societies, local communities that are allowed to be
self-governed, without interference from some bureaucrat who purports to
know better while operating aloof from the fray of local quotidian life.

Corruption at the community level is far smaller in scope than the abuse
of power at the gigantist centre.  It also is easier to spot and address
in a timely manner, given that at the local scale people can practice
genuine, participative democracy, while having full access to the
information that concerns _their_ public good.

We should not entertain a romantic view of humanity.  Forget about the
chimera of the selfless technocrats who take care of all of our needs
while we blithely go on with our frivolous lifestyle.  But also dismiss
the equally baseless belief in "the people" as an integral whole that
expresses a singular will; a will that the career reformist claims to
grasp and express in its fullest, purest way.  These magnitudes of
people, nation, etc.  are artificial constructs.  Expedient
abstractions, whose treatment as actual beings all too often facilitates
gigantism's quest for total control: to weaken people, to place them in
precarious conditions, divide them and disempower them by means of
displacement, solitude, and detachment from their natural and cultural
milieu.

Let us remain realistic, cynical: expect the worst and plan accordingly.
To go down the path of mainstream leftists is to throw to the wind
everything that history and everyday experience teaches us.
