---
title: 'Note on supporting free culture'
subtitle: 'Do not allow copyright to be a tool for tyranny'
excerpt: 'Why it is important to support free/libre culture and code, especially in light of Article 13 and similar rules.'
---

I get asked to comment on the EU's copyright reform, specifically the
infamous "Article 13".  Because I think the legal technicalities might
obscure the broader issue at play, I will not address them—we already
know they are bad.  Instead, I share my thoughts on copyright itself and
why we should support free/libre culture as an antipode to proprietary
tyranny.

Please bear in mind that this is a mere "note" and that I plan to
revisit the topic at greater length once I have enough time at my
disposal.

* * *

The backlash to "Article 13" has revealed the pitfalls of
_propertarianism_ which, in this case, manifests as a drive to preserve
and strengthen copyright at all costs.  Intellectual property becomes
the vehicle for the suppression of free, decentralised expression.  It
functions as the tool for the promotion of oligopolistic interests and
the expansion of [platformarch power](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/).

Article 13 is not the problem per se.  It is yet another chapter in the
proliferation of copyright as an instrument for proprietary control over
every aspect of daily life.  Copyright laws keep expanding in scope.
They are being used to satisfy the economic establishment and to
normalise anti-consumer practices.  For example, DRM (Digital Rights
Management) has become a norm even though it is the most odious form of
[anti-user technology](https://www.defectivebydesign.org/).  Similarly
'patent trolls' attempt to kill any kind of competition by launching law
suits against anything that might seem to infringe upon their
intellectual property.

People who are against Article 13 should realise that there is an
inherent link between copyright and capitalism (for the Nth time:
"capitalism" is not the same as "free market").  Other things being
equal, a strong commitment to intellectual property is a major boost to
the capitalist organisation of society—a win for
[gigantism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/).

As a response to the proprietary juggernaut, we should oppose any piece
of legislation that is in the spirit of "Article 13".  But we should not
limit ourselves to that battle, in large part because the economic
interests have enough money to convert corrupt politicians into their
assignees.  Instead, we must **turn the force of copyright against it**,
a [licensing technique known as copyleft](https://copyleft.org/).

In practice, copyleft can be expressed in ordinary language as follows:
_I, the copyright owner, choose to share my intellectual property with
everyone, allowing them to make modifications, and use it as they see
fit, **provided** they share their derivative work under the same terms
as I_.  We call works that are governed by such licenses "free", in
reference to freedom, not cost.  A common distinction along those lines
is between _libre_ and _gratis_.  Copyleft concerns the former: you can
still sell stuff under a libre license.

The most popular licenses that provide copyleft provisions are the
_Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike_ ([CC
BY-SA](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode)) and
the _GNU General Public License_ ([GNU
GPL](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html)).  The former is used
for writings, or forms of artistic expression, while the latter is
typically applied to software code.  As an aside, all my work on this
website—protesilaos.com—is distributed under the terms of these two
licenses.

I am a proponent of free/libre culture and software as a vehicle for
user and consumer freedom.  As we can tell from the "Article 13" fiasco,
this is no longer about liberty in the narrow sense of sharing works of
art or programs with our peers or with strangers.  At stake is the very
essence of democratic rule: the freedom of expression.  It also is a
matter of collective self-determination: we shift the balance of power
in our favour by undermining the plutocrats' stratagems.

This is the point about liberty: it is a collective experience.  We must
all emancipate our intellectual works from the restrictions of
copyright, so that we might enjoy unencumbered cultural expression and
computing experience.

I thus call on everyone out there who is a writer, artist, programmer—
anyone who has something to share with the rest of the world—to license
their work under the appropriate copyleft license.  The larger the pool
of free culture items, the greater our resilience to the machinations of
the economic elite and their flunkies in office.
