---
title: 'After Capitalism'
subtitle: 'No more delusions of progressivism'
excerpt: 'The idea of "progressive capitalism" is fundamentally flawed.  It remains trapped in gigantist thinking.'
---

In a May 30 column for _Project Syndicate_ titled ["After Neoliberalism"](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/after-neoliberalism-progressive-capitalism-by-joseph-e-stiglitz-2019-05)
eminent economist Joseph Stiglitz propounds a view of reforming the
established political order in an effort to address its failures.  The
alternative is touted as "progressive capitalism".  It hinges on the
basic idea that the state shall have a one-way relationship with the
market, manipulating it without ever succumbing to its pressures.

While I appreciate Mr. Stiglitz's observations about the state of
affairs, I find the essence of "progressive capitalism" fundamentally
flawed.  It does not deviate from the core tenet of conventional
statecraft: [gigantism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/).

Progressives delude themselves into thinking that the problems in the
current order rest with ideology or just the wrong people being in
power.  Their thinking is that, ceteris paribus, tweaks in mindset and
a change in faces is all that is needed to nudge the juggernaut into
doing the right thing.  Thus they remain oblivious to the inherent
tendency of hierarchies to persist and proliferate.

It is a mistake to believe that the concentration of wealth and
concomitant power is a function of ideology, in this case neoliberalism.
The problem is germane to the political organisation itself.  The modern
state is a monolith that seeks to bring everything under its control.
And, as we can see in Europe, there is a growing propensity to insist on
the aggrandisement of state structures, with the EU seeking to gain
ever-more competences.

A large state apparatus can only ever give rise to an oligarchy.  This
is a systemic phenomenon.  The further away the state is from the
citizen, the less representative and more concentrative it necessarily
becomes.  Ideology is secondary to the mechanics of power distribution.
It is why the symbiosis of political and economic elites is not peculiar
to the neoliberal world order.  It was made manifest in the USSR as well
as empires of yore.  It is readily apparent in China, Russia, and across
all presumably non-neoliberal countries.

The gigantist state creates the economic elite out of sheer necessity to
extend its control.  Think of how a state may approach tax collection,
for instance:

* One way is to allow everyone to use whatever fiduciary medium the free
  market allows and process payments in whichever manner the individuals
  decide.
* The other is to impose a state-sanctioned currency, controlled by
  a central authority, and to force everyone to run their transactions
  through a controlled environment that can be regulated with greater
  ease.

The latter is the model we have.  State fiat gives us money and the
banking system, with which we are to conduct out business.  In turn, the
state gets to monitor all activity and impose taxation at will.  In this
scenario, the bankers qua enablers emerge out of the desire of the
authorities to make their tax-collecting mechanism more efficient.  In
turn, the economic establishment needs an omnipotent state to shield it
from competition.  The economic elite turns into the class of
platformarchs thanks to the support of the authorities.  It is
a mutualist existence.

Those who genuinely believe that capitalism is the same as the free
market are naive.  Capitalism is the tandem of economic and political
interests which produces the two-tier economic system we are familiar
with: that of platformarchs and platformzens.  There is no such thing as
an even playing field.  One set of rules applies to the economic
elite—rules that allow them to _be the elite_—and another to the rest of
us.  They are the enablers, we are just renting out our life.  Security
for them, precarity for us.  Just consider the oodles of _free money_
that have been pumped into the financial sector under the euphemism of
"quantitative easing".  The banksters are subsidised, while the rest of
us are forced to brutishly survive on the precipice.

In a similar fashion, the gigantist state controls the people who will
ever be allowed in power.  It is sheer folly to believe that what we
have today is democracy in its proper sense.  Either because of
electoral laws and vote counting (minimum threshold, district
representation, etc.), the control of the media by a select few, the
uneven distribution of sponsorship, those who are heard the most are the
ones who are favoured to do so.  Small parties are not given the same
resources and time "on air" as the incumbent ones.

This is how the hierarchy expresses its survival instinct.  It chooses
the people who will perpetuate it.  And because gigantism must control
every aspect of life to be most effective, the hierarchies have
a built-in drive to grow larger, more homogeneous, and self-aware.

Lord Acton's observation that "all power tends to corrupt; absolute
power corrupts absolutely" contains both a truth and a potential
misunderstanding.  Power begets power.  Though this is not "corruption"
in the ordinary sense of moral degradation—that implies the falsehood
that some incorruptible leader can set things right (per the
"progressive capitalist" rhetoric, for example).  "Corruption" in this
sense is the normal operation of concentrated power striving for its
continuity.

To this end, neoliberalism is but an epiphenomenon: an ideology that
masks the underlying propensities of the gigantist establishment.  It is
not the defining feature of our times, but its rationalisation.

What every progressive economist in the mould of Mr. Stiglitz fails to
understand is that the emphasis on efficiency and growth, which
translates into economies of scale, is the path to gigantism.  To
illustrate my point: I am a real bread baker.  I prepare my own
sourdough loaf at home and share it with my community.  Actions such as
this, once standardised, make the community more autarkic and resilient.
We do not consume the junk peddled by the industry.  And we are
healthier as a result, meaning that we do not need the other kind of
rubbish sold by big pharma.  If my concern was solely about efficiency,
then locally baked bread would be a bad idea: industrial loaf would be
the way to go.

The same reasoning applies in agriculture.  Doing things locally allows
us to engage in what I call "ecosystemic agriculture", which rests on
the principles of polyculture, biodiversity, respect of the natural
constraints, and appreciation of humans' role as yet another part in the
greater system (this is the _contextualised human_ in contrast to the
[fantasies of the decontextualised human](https://protesilaos.com/hsw/)
held by individualism and anthropocentrism).

Think about it: if we all work in our small piece of land and do not
target maximum output of a single good in the name of "efficiency"
(polyculture instead of monoculture), we remove the dependency on
chemicals: the ecosystem delivers crops without pampers—effectively
a form of "doping"—that have disastrous consequences.  By eliminating
that dependency, we have not only contributed to the sustainable
rebalancing of the ecosystem, but have also taken power away from
incumbent economic interests.  In the process we have also denied the
state apparatus its control over our farming.  Bureaucrats think they
know best—such hubris!  Their solution always involves some sort of
gigantism, with the EU's Common Agricultural Policy being a case in
point.

The gist is that "progressive capitalism" can only be yet another
incarnation of the status quo.  Our goal should not be the preservation
or mere beautification of this political order, but its utter
annihilation.  We will make real progress when we no longer entertain
notions of gigantism, switching instead to communitarianism and
localism.  We must go small, to the organic unit of society: the local
community.

Communities already have everything a progressive ostensibly wants to
impose from the top as an enlightened despot.  They share strong bonds
between them.  They exhibit genuine solidarity among their members and
impress upon them a sense of belonging.  They distribute knowledge and
resources.  Communities are what makes people stronger.

Gigantism does not want organic social groups.  It keeps us in
precarious living conditions and promotes individualism.  Together these
are what turn us against each other.  We fall back to our base instinct
for survival, treating everyone out there as a potential threat and
enemy.  All due to our precarious predicament and the misguided
commitment to archetypes of the individualist sort.

It is no surprise that the alternative to gigantism is gigantism of
another kind.  Mr. Stiglitz and others like him are, perhaps unbeknownst
to them, are given exposure because they pose no threat to the system.
Their solution is yet another calamity waiting to happen.

