---
title: 'The shadow play of "populism"'
excerpt: 'The establishment wants us to place disproportionate emphasis on an invented threat, while we disregard the real issues around us.'
---

I listened to the Project Syndicate podcast [Understanding Economic
Populism](https://www.project-syndicate.org/podcasts/understanding-economic-populism)
(published on 2019-08-27).  The title is misleading because it does
not offer any real insight into the specifics of the topic at hand.
The discussion revolves around the tenuous binary of liberalism vs
populism, where the former ostensibly represents prudent policy-making
with an eye for its longer-term implications, while the latter stands
for opportunistic measures that simply feed off of people's fears.

The impression I got out of listening to this episode is that I have
heard these same arguments a hundred times over.  As such, the present
essay will address the topic without being limited to the specifics of
the given podcast.  Here are some general remarks before I delve into
the specifics:

+ The term "populism" is inherently problematic.  It is not properly
  defined.  It does not refer to any one group.  For an analysis to
  have credibility, both _clarity of concept_ and _precision of
  statement_ are required.
+ Any social-political research programme that examines economics in a
  vacuum is fundamentally misguided.  You need to look past economic
  indicators: start examining the distribution of power and control
  within the political whole in order to appreciate the interplay of
  economic factors _beyond their phenomenality_.
+ On the economic front, mainstream economists repeat the same-old
  fallacy that plagues their profession: that of thinking of
  indicators as mere mechanics that are detached from actual human
  beings.  A closely-related fallacy is the belief that their
  exhortations and appeals to scientific objectivity are freed from
  tacit moral assumptions.

## There is no populism as such

Whenever someone groups together the likes of Donald Trump, Boris
Johnson, Vladimir Putin, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Viktor Orban, Jeremy
Corbin, Yanis Varoufakis, other leftists, etc., you know they are
making broad generalisations that cannot withstand scrutiny.

The argument is that these politicians belong together because they
all allude to "the people" as a means of forwarding their agenda.  The
populist, the thinking goes, is one who juxtaposes an idealised people
with an oppressive elite or some other group that labours against the
general good.

But this too is fundamentally flawed.  For all the politics of
modernity can be characterised, in one way or another, by its
commitment to the wellness of the people.  The very constitution of
the United States of America is formulated by "the people" ("We the
people"), implying that power springs from—and is ultimately exercised
by—the totality of citizens.  The French Revolution gave us Article 3
of the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, which
is, prima facie, about the citizenry being in charge of their polity
(I analyse this in my essay [Against the secularised theology of
statecraft](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-06-14-secularised-theology-statecraft/)).

Every politician that runs for office must always demonstrate their
commitment to the commons.  No one ever got elected by outright
claiming to oppose the interests of the many.  Even authoritarian
leaders claim to exercise their rule with the well-being of their
subjects in mind, either explicitly or by alluding to a proxy such as
"the homeland".

Practically every country on the planet is instituted as a
nation-state which rests on the idea that the nation—the people in its
cultural-historical continuity—is identified with the state apparatus
that operates within the confines of the homeland.  Again, the tacit
claim is that "the people" are in power and that the task of
governance is to serve their interest.

International law, the very fabric of modern world affairs, is built
on the principles of nation-statism.  Practically every aspect of our
politics is designed to _offer the impression_ of catering to the
masses.

Yet the self-righteous analyst who toils against 'the populists' will
blithely insist on using the term "populism", as if they have
discovered something new; something that improves the instruments we
have for describing phenomena.  What happens instead is to create
confusion, to counter ambiguity with greater ambiguity, blanket
statements with more of the same, and to ultimately provide grist to
the mill of those who thrive on misinformation.

Analysts of this sort will argue that populists share the defining
feature of seeing the world in binary terms: the people against the
elite, us against them, the virtuous majority facing the treacherous
minority.  The contradiction they fail to recognise is that this line
of thinking follows the same pattern of contrasting absolutes: the
populists versus the liberals, the cosmopolites versus the nativists,
etc.

The truth is that political reality is far more complex.  Rather than
arguing for either of the extremes, we must appreciate the spectrum of
possible combinations and permutations in between the various
analytical constructs.  And, most importantly, we must understand that
there are several factors that need to be accounted for, in order to
reach any tenable conclusion.

There is a place for generalisations: to understand broader trends, or
the abstract structure of various epiphenomena of political
organisation.  But the general must not be conflated with the
particular.  When speaking about specific persons, groups, political
parties, governments, etc. we must keep generalisations to a minimum,
else make it clear that such claims would require further
qualifications in order to properly describe the state of affairs.

The analyst who cavalierly propounds arguments against some fictitious
group—against 'the populists'—is an analyst in name only.  But perhaps
such a case is not as innocuous as someone being wrong, since those
people tend to form part of the intelligentsia.  They hold positions
of authority.  They are in contact with governments or powerful
economic interests.  They are given a platform to spread their
falsehoods (e.g. a podcast on Project Syndicate).  And so on.

## The gigantist distribution of power

Every introductory course on economics or political science will, at
some point, expound on the equality of the agents in the system.  It
comes down to the following:

+ In a modern democracy all citizens are treated the same way, all
  have the same opportunities to achieve flourishing.
+ The role of politics is to establish a level-playing field where
  equality is actualised and the forces of the market can deliver
  their blessings.
+ Along those lines, capitalism is touted as an inherently fair
  construct.  Since all members are subject to the same rules, every
  economic outcome, even if undesirable at first, is ultimately
  contributing to a net positive (it maximises utility) due to how
  rationality on the macro scale supposedly works out.

Any outright undesired effects of economic activity are described as a
"market failure", while any shortcomings in the political process are
attributed to a number of factors with 'the populists' being the new
bugaboo.  At any rate, the fundamental assumption of fairness and
equality as the core attributes of the legal-institutional
architecture are never put into question.

The real world, however, does not conform with these idealised notions
because it has a feature that is omitted from textbooks: the
distribution of power and control.

Take, for example, the freedom of speech.  You will notice how _the
platforms_ where someone can voice their opinion are controlled by a
handful of people or corporations, such social media silos like
Facebook, Twitter, Linkedin (Microsoft), or by media proprietors like
Rupert Murdoch and Axel Springer SE.  Yet the naive politician will
keep on touting "media pluralism"…

The same sort of concentration can be found in every sector of
economic activity.  A small group of software giants dominates the
tech industry.  The banking industry is an oligopoly with strong
symbiotic ties with public institutions, by means of central banking,
fractional reserves, implicit state guarantees, outright bail-outs,
etc.

Capitalism is the _ideology_ by which state intervention must be made
in the interest of the capital-owners.  In practice though, capitalism
creates two types of capital owner: the platformarchs and the
platformzens.  The former are those who own critical infrastructure,
essential intellectual property, the very access to the industry (the
concentration mentioned above).  The latter are the ones who can only
operate on top of what the platformarchs render possible.

This binary, when combined with political reality, can be reduced to a
distinction between security and precarity.  The government will never
allow a platformarch to go out of business because they are "too big
to fail".  In a similar fashion, political elites find it expedient to
favour the expansion of platformarch control, because it makes it
easier to perform various tasks of governance.  It is easier, for
example, for police authorities to have a detailed profile of someone
who was active on social media, since all data is already collected,
collated, synthesised.  Taxation becomes more straightforward when
every transaction goes through the banking system.  And so on.

In turn, platformarchs use their resources to promote politicians who
will do their bidding.  You think you have a right to run for office:
modern democracy is all about equality and such.  Well, good luck
finding funds, getting media exposure, and so on, while still
retaining an independent voice…

As such, political and economic elites feed off of each other.  The
state apparatus and the platformarchs have a symbiotic relationship
that extends to every aspect of public life.  This is the oligarchy of
our times which, in truth, differs only in its surface aspects from
the feudal order of yesteryear.

I term this phenomenon _gigantism_.  A self-conscious hierarchy with
the tendency to concentrate more authority at the top; a hierarchy
whose purpose and destiny is to expand its reach and proliferate.

The cornerstone of this order is the sanctification of property and
the treatment of intellectual property as of equal or superior status
to its physical counterpart.  The platformarchs hold the legal titles
that allow them to extract rent, but also to assiduously and
unscrupulously combat any form of competition.  When that is not
enough to secure their position they will simply buy out any rising
challenger, such as how Facebook has acquired Instagram and WhatsApp,
further consolidating its status as the de facto portal to the social
web.

What the mainstream economist will consider as the ordinary operation
of the free market is, in fact, the reinforcement of the two-tier
economic order of capitalism (platformarchs and platformzens).  The
so-called "free market" is but a stratified one.  Politics is no
different, given how individuals of a certain background or with the
right connections gain access to power.

Against this backdrop, it is pointless to talk about modern democracy
and capitalism as essentially just and egalitarian.  To do so would be
to substitute reality with ideology.  Our very experience tells us
that not all of us are treated equally, not all businesses enjoy the
same level of protection, not all voices are granted a megaphone with
direct access to the wider public…  Yet we are indoctrinated in
lauding the establishment for its fairness and we are constantly
bombarded with disinformation about how good things are and how any
faults are primarily of our own doing.

It also is quite telling how the intelligentsia has found an expedient
answer to any potential problem: 'the populists' are to be blamed.  As
such, the talk about populism functions as a _meta-narrative_: an ex
ante rationalisation of theories about the underlying soundness of the
present order, as well as a prior legitimation for any labelling
technique against those who may question the status quo.  Now every
argument against the establishment is stigmatised as populist,
_therefore_, as essentially equivalent to the governance of Putin,
Erdogan, and co.

An example of this cheap trickery is the very excerpt of the
aforementioned Project Syndicate podcast:

> For the last several years, populist leaders have wreaked havoc on
> the institutions and norms that have underpinned the liberal world
> order.  And their policies are increasingly placing the global
> economy at risk.

It conveniently ignores the fact that said liberal world order
produced the economic crisis in the first place and did everything
within its power to ensure that the losses where distributed to the
many, while the profits stayed with the few.  Unless, of course, the
likes of Alan Greenspan and the chorus of economists/apologists who
touted "efficient markets", as well as the policy-makers that were in
charge during the crisis, are all part of this illustrious group of
populist leaders…

Enough with this nonsense!

## Economistic ideology and moralism

It is common for economists to speak of economic indicators without
recognising the underlying human aspects of them.  Part of that is
legitimate when doing specialised research.  But it turns out to be
highly problematic when directly converted into guidelines for policy
initiatives without further interdisciplinary feedback.

A case in point, though far from the only one, is the concept of
"human capital".  On the face of it, this is a technical term for
describing a factor of production.  Nothing untoward about it.
However, the dehumanisation of individuals and their subsequent
treatment as raw input has the following side-effects:

+ Humans are treated as interchangeable, without any real downsides.
  Like cogs in a machine.
+ Humans are extracted from their cultural-social background.  They
  are decontextualised.

From these follows a core of tacit _moral claims_ that disguise as
scientific insight:

+ A pro-migration stance that only sees individuals as easily
  relocatable resources.  This encourages mass migration which, in
  turn, increases the competition for domestic jobs and, thus, the
  precarity of those with an occupation.  The economist's
  pro-migration stance is an implicit affirmation of the positives of
  precarity for the maximisation of business gains.
+ The perpetuation of the myth of the "rugged individual", the homo
  economicus who moulds its destiny by sheer force of will.  This
  mythical being optimises its behaviour by _thinking on the margin_
  (in economic parlance) and by being prepared to migrate once the
  conditions demand as much.  This means that the person is no longer
  attached to their locality, their community and, more importantly,
  their land.

The combined effect of the above is summarised thus:

1. A vicious cycle of uncertainty for the majority of people.  It is
   why people are willing to tolerate such egregious conditions as
   unpaid internships, work without extra benefits during Sundays or
   holidays, long hours well beyond the purported 8-hour shift, etc.
   Reported unemployment indicators can be used to deceive the public,
   as they typically disregard such qualitative aspects of reality.
2. Precarity pushes wages downward, while capital gains continue to
   increase.  This effectively translates into an irresistible drive
   for a more uneven distribution of resources _and_ control.
   Combined with the expansion of platformarch power, this results in
   the further entrenchment of oligopolies in every sector of the
   economy.  As such "capital gains", typically refers to more
   benefits for the economic elite.
3. People are encouraged to become even more individualistic and to
   stop thinking about camaraderie.  Emphasis is placed on their
   mobility and flexibility.  They must remain detached from other
   people in their proximity, since they are all replaceable with
   relative ease.  Meanwhile, platformarchs know all too well how to
   join forces when pushing for government reforms that suit their
   interests.
4. There is an ever-greater concentration of arable land—land in
   general—in the hands of new aspiring feudal lords (platformarchs
   getting into agriculture).  This contributes to the erosion of
   local communities and thus to the collective disempowerment of the
   people involved.  In turn, this sets the stage for a fully-fledged
   recrudescence of manorialism and feudalism.  Whenever people
   realise that life in the city is unsustainable due to exorbitant
   living costs and return back to their village they will find out
   that their commune has become nothing but a large consolidated
   title held by the new local baron who serves yet greater interests.
5. Brain drain is never recognised for what it actually is: a form of
   colonialism.  Instead "human capital" from underdeveloped countries
   is encouraged to move into developed countries in droves where
   their skills can add greater value to the economy.  The pernicious
   effect of brain drain is a structural degradation of life in the
   country of origin, a form of impoverishment and critical resource
   depletion, that decisively diminishes its capacity for innovation
   and cultural fulfilment.  Brain drain also lowers the defences of a
   country to the speculative attacks of vested economic interests
   from developed countries.

The notion that representative democracy has made us all equal is
ludicrous.  Just as there is no genuinely free market in a capitalist
order that produces and favours platformarchs.

In short, the mainstream economist's exhortations have ideological
underpinnings and moral assumptions that favour a specific state of
affairs.  They are not objective, at least not to the degree proper
science would demand.  It is why they should be considered
_economistic_ rather than outright economic observations.

Still, the economist qua apologist of the status quo will pretend to
be free of bias and will insist on us "listening to what economists
have to say"; to listen to the economists that are promoted on the
establishment's media platforms to remind us how great things are…

## The focus on populism is a distraction

The overarching theme here is that we should not get dragged into the
fake dilemmas that the intelligentsia wants to impose on us.  Just as
we should not take their every word at face value.  Furthermore, we
must not entertain the beguiling fallacies and selective reasoning of
economists who imply that because we do not live in absolutely brutish
conditions, we should be eternally grateful to capitalism.

On the topic of populism, politicians such as Trump, Salvini, Orban,
conform with my analysis that [the extreme right is the new
right](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-04-23-far-right-new-right/).
There is nothing new about them.  Just a recurring theme among
conservatives.  While the likes of Putin and Erdogan need to be
examined in the wider context of their respective country's
cultural-historical path dependencies, where it will be made clear
that, yet again, the talk about "populism" is misplaced.  A similarly
inquisitive approach must apply to the various left-wing politicians
that are described as populists.

Much of the public dialogue—which is not _public_ given the
centralised control of the media—focuses on the vaunted threat posed
by populists.  We are conditioned to worry about problems that do not
really exist and to place disproportionate emphasis on minor details.
All while the greater issues that define our times are altogether
ignored or talked about as natural constants or benign by-products of
an inherently virtuous political order.

This is the challenge we are facing: to cut through the misinformation
and to recognise pseudo-science on the spot.  In parallel, we must be
prepared to mount an offensive against the forces that seek to control
every aspect of our life.  For that we need to cultivate the values of
communitarianism and localism; to understand that the true answer to
gigantism is the replacement of the status quo with a distributed
system of largely autarkic and autonomous collectives.
