---
title: 'Against the secularised theology of statecraft'
subtitle: 'I reject nation-statism'
excerpt: 'Analysis of the underlying values of our era as a continuation of Medieval Theocracy. I reject the deified nation and nation-statism.'
---

This article is a continuation of my previous posts.  Read them to get
a sense of the context:

* [On Gigantism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/).
* [After Capitalism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-05-31-after-capitalism/).

* * *

The central ideology of statecraft and of international relations in
general is nation-statism, i.e. the assignment of personhood to the
construct of the nation-state.  Nation-statism combines the three
present entities of the nation, the state, the homeland into an
imaginary being.  The nation-state is thus perceived as the unit of
international affairs, the bearer of sovereignty, the embodiment of
popular will and the incarnation of the national interest.

The nation-state is thought as having a personality of its own, as
expressed in quotidian language where "America demands", "Germany
intends", etc.  Against this backdrop, statecraft is largely concerned
with specifying that which is "national" in accordance with the evolving
demands of governance.

Such beliefs have been embedded in popular consciousness roughly since
the Peace Treaty of Westphalia (1648) and later the French Revolution
(1789).  These encompass the values about political conduct that bridged
the transition from the Medieval times to Modernity.

The statecraft of the Middle Ages had as its midpoint certain
theological propositions that justified the superstructure of the
vertical distribution of power.  Royalty as a function of "God's Will".
Campaigns in the name of "The Lord".  Crowns, fiefs, generalised serfdom
grounded in some mystical "exogenous" legitimation of the political
order.

Whereas the turn to nation-statism changed the surface aspects of
statecraft.  The agent of political will became the nation-state as
such, while older institutions lost their significance, at least on the
face of it or _in purely symbolic terms_.  Structural injustices
remained constant, nonetheless: the role of the feudal lord is now
assumed by the platformarch, the capital owner who operates in symbiotic
relationship with the state apparatus.

Despite the superficial similarities and differences between the now and
then, I hold that modernism is essentially the reformulation of dogmas
of yore.  What the transition to the modern era achieved is the
_secularisation of the Medieval value system_, in every aspect of
political organisation, including matters of individuality.

## The nation-state as an exalted being

Let us consider how Medieval theology about the legitimation of
authority was secularised and how, through that process, the new order
is but the continuation of the older through different means.

Here is Article 3 of the [Declaration of the Rights of Human and Citizen
of 1789](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6c/Declaration_of_the_Rights_of_Man_and_of_the_Citizen_in_1789.jpg) (translation is mine from the original in French):

>The principle of all sovereignty resides essentially with the nation.
>No body, no individual, can exercise authority that does not emanate
>expressly from it.

>Le principe de toute souveraineté reside essentiellement dans la
>nation, nul corps, nul individu, ne peut exercer d'autorité qui n'en
>émane expressement.

On the face of it, this article appears revolutionary.  It seems to put
an end to the aristocracy's claims on undisputed rule, while offering
people the right to define their polity themselves.  Perhaps the
construct of the nation-state is an important step forward in human
history.

Yet upon closer inspection it shall become evident that this provision
does not necessitate any change whatsoever, insofar as the balance of
power in society is concerned, as evidenced by 200+ years of
nation-statism.

If we replace Article 3's references to the "nation" with overtly
theological propositions, we can draw some useful conclusions:

>The principle of all sovereignty resides essentially with ~~the
>nation~~ **God**.  No body, no individual, can exercise authority that
>does not emanate expressly from ~~it~~ **Him**.

We see that the legitimation of authority continues to be treated as
exogenous to the governors and the governed.  Meanwhile, the overall
ambiguity of what exactly _is_ the nation, is consistent with the
theological notion of a prior truth; something that is necessary for
every dogma.  It does not really matter what character one may give to
that which remains undefined, obscure, and impossible to verify
objectively.  What is of import here is the status of the proposition:
it is treated as undeniable, as a given.  And as with all such
worldviews, it gives excessive power to those who are designated as its
interpretors.  In other words, the deification of the nation is a blank
check in the hands of the establishment.

The nation remains undefined and, therefore, the ruling class gets to
substantiate it as it sees fit.  For example, the French government
wages war in the middle of Africa supposedly in the name of the national
interest, as if that is of any tangible benefit to the average French
farmer.  The ones who gain the most from jingoism, resource extraction,
mass displacement of populations, are the large corporations that
operate symbiotically with the state apparatus.

There no longer exists imperialism of the old style, where a metropolis
has colonies across the world.  Now everything is couched in terms of
"national necessity" or "need" or "interest" that is all too often
perfectly aligned with the plans of multinational companies (e.g.
American oil companies being the natural extension of USA's geopolitical
stratagems).

Through the ever-evolving hermeneutics of nation-statism, the nation is
identified with the power elite.  The national interest is whatever
profits the powers that be.  National will is but the machinations of
the establishment.  Whatever historical change is limited to ceremonial
aspects of life.  What one was the domain of the kingdom, protectorate,
colony now goes by the name of "national space", while the subjects of
the feudal master are now the subjects of the omnipotent nation-state.
As for the old aristocracy, they become owners of mega-corporations and
through their association with the state turn into platformarchs.

The role of the apologist of the status quo is no longer performed by
the priests of the prevalent religion.  A chorus of "secular" thinkers
is enough: theologians without a god, typically maintaining the social
status of doctor (philosophy doctor == PhD, though as a rule of thumb
they are as far from philosophy as they can be).  These are the
intellectual vanguard of the establishment.  Political scientists,
economists, lawyers, poets that idealise conventional wisdom: the
intelligentsia that accompanies the construct of gigantism.  Of course,
the power and influence of religions has remained in tact.  In fact,
they can now pretend that their role is purely moral, as if morality can
ever be cleanly separated from the rest of intersubjective behaviour and
experience; as if, that is, it does not inform the decisions of humans
on a daily basis and in every aspect of their life.

The "analysts" that support gigantism are the ones who contrary to real
science hold as objective truths a range of conventions that facilitate
the powers that be, such as the sanctity of property, "natural" and
"inalienable" rights, economic growth as a synonym for prosperity, etc.
They are the ones who perpetuate myths such as that the nation expresses
itself through the shadow play of partitocracy known as "elections" that
are nothing more than a competition between corporate sponsors and
lobbies.  There can be no free and fair elections while there is an
uneven distribution of resources and for as long as the media are
controlled by the oligarchy (media pluralism is a myth).

The establishment's proponents are also the ones who give credence to
the belief that the concentration of wealth and power in the hands of
the platformarchs and the concomitant consolidation of plutocracy is
nothing but the ordinary operation of the "free market".  And they
blithely dismiss any counterpoint by claiming that this is fair because
we are ostensibly equal and can all achieve that status, provided we
work hard enough.  If you point to the nexus of interests that exist,
who controls credit and money and all media of communication, and how
only conniving entrepreneurs who have insider support get to do things,
you are labelled all sorts of things.  In true pseudoscientific fashion,
any criticism, any expression of doubt, is rejected in advance.

And to add insult to injury, these pseudoscientists and the activists
that have internalised their rhetoric will have the audacity to suggest
that a referendum in the form of a binary choice to a complex,
multifaceted issue is the pinnacle of democracy.  This is plain wrong!
Voicing an open-ended "yes" or "no" to a process that we had no say in
and, most importantly, without being able to specify the meaning of the
result, is but a charade.  Referenda are a form of extortion, the
litanies of the apologists notwithstanding.

## Opposing the underlying values of gigantism

Rome (eastern and western) consolidated its global hegemony, its brand
of gigantism, in large part thanks to Christianity.  The Christian dogma
took form by means of imperial interventions and ecumenical synods,
while the new religion was imposed on the masses by state edict, fire
and steel.  In Roman theocracy, there is one supreme ruler—the
emperor—who reigns over everything, just as there is one almighty deity
(the _pantokrator_).  Then there is a single hierarchy that expresses
the true word of the deity: the church with an undisputed figurehead
(vertical power structures with a religious character is from where
"hier-archy" takes its name).  The Roman model imposes top-down control
in both "secular" and "mystical" aspects of life, with the locus of
authority being the ruling elite.  This was a form of totalitarianism
that justified itself as the will of some exogenous force.  The reign of
the few over the many.  The absolute asymmetry in the distribution of
power.

The Westphalian worldview of the personalised state, which the French
imagination converted into the nation-state, has not challenged the
Roman framework.  There has been a change in faces and methods, largely
due to technological advances.  For instance, the modern state purports
to oppose totalitarianism, as it appropriates and twists democracy,
while alluding to liberal values in order to forward its illiberal
ambitions.

Similarly, the Enlightenment did not refute the prior given truths it
purported to oppose.  Humanity was never truly enlightened in the sense
of being emancipated from the values of the Medieval era.  Instead, the
Enlightenment helped secularise them and essentially repackage them for
use in the new age.  As such, the Biblical individual becomes the
decontextualised human of anthropocentrism, which is the cornerstone of
contemporary morality.  The prejudice of free will, i.e. of some
mystical force or intrinsic property that is unique to humankind, was
never placed under scrutiny.  Consequently, the basis of conventional
wisdom remains largely constant since the time of Augustine.

We must free ourselves from the fallacy of the decontextualised being
that exercises free will irrespective of the global magnitudes within
which it operates.  Humanity has nothing special about it.  It is just
another part of the whole.  A species of animal that bears lots of
similarities with other forms of life, especially those that share
common characteristics with it, like mammals.  Whatever differences are
of degree, not category.  Human is determined or influenced by
underlying biological and chemical factors that reveal dynamic spheres
of probable outcomes that are always subject to natural constants.

Questioning the figments of anthropocentrism in all its variations is
the starting point of a holistic ethics which, in practice, manifests as
a life that is conducted in accordance with nature and with humility
towards the rest of the ecosystem.

A people's moral conscience, its set of unchallenged traditions and
basic beliefs, always exerts centripetal power against any kind of
root-and-branch re-institution of society.  All hitherto revolutions
failed to achieved the ultimate end of obliterating the old order,
because the revolutionaries never truly internalised the importance of
first displacing the prevailing morality which, in the case of
Christianity, was imposed on them by Rome and its imitators.

In this light, it is no surprise that the French Revolution heralded
a new wave of imperialism that holds true to this day despite its
permutations.  Or how the supposed communist regime of Russia evolved
into a top-down tyranny of the technocrats and the party elites (with
the qualitative difference being that the function of the prior truth
was initially performed by the messianic-style determinism of the class
struggle).

A successful revolution can only be one that emanates from a shift in
conscience and is then expressed as a decisive change in institutions.
Put simply, there is a choice to be made between remaining true to the
overarching value system of the decontextualised human or being
a revolutionary.  The two are incompatible.

## The turn to communitarianism

The struggle for communitarianism cannot be expended in pursuit of
marginal reforms of the established order.  The goal is not merely the
decentralisation of power, but the generalised opposition to all forms
of gigantism: in politics, the economy, agriculture, interpersonal
affairs.

This implies the rejection of conventional beliefs about statecraft as
well as a comprehensive review of traditional morality.  None of the
components or subsets or elements of the ruling elite must remain
untouched.  New institutions require new modes of thinking.  Only in
this way can we achieve the organic polity, centred on the principle of
the citizen-owner-guardian.

It is clear that the turn to communitarianism also requires relentless
criticism of our history.  We must stop beautifying the conditions in
which our ancestors lived, i.e. the legacy of Rome.

Communitarianism is not the transfer of power to the regional
administrations.  That would just create localised tyrannies.
Communitarianism is the conscious struggle against the gigantism of our
times.  It is a fight for the _contextualised human_: the being that
lives on its land, its natural habitat, in cultural affinity with its
fellow people, while sharing biological ties with them.

Consequently, sovereignty does not emanate from some imaginary supreme
entity, be it a deity or the nation.  Supreme political authority is the
sum of each person's power within their community.  It is the natural
strength that is used to define interpersonal relations and to safeguard
our commons.
