---
title: 'The untenable capitalist case against billionaires'
excerpt: 'There is no real value to a so-called "capitalist" thesis against inequality.'
---

In [the historical case for abolishing
billionaires](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/dec/14/the-historical-case-for-abolishing-billionaires),
Linsey McGoey formulates a capitalist argument against inequality and
billionaires, by alluding to the relevant views of intellectuals of yore
such as Adam Smith.  While I appreciate any effort that undermines the
conservative narratives, and am aligned with McGoey's underlying values,
I am not convinced this approach can be effective.

The fundamental problem is the very notion of a capitalist critique of
billionaires.  I hold that, upon closer inspection, it leads us to the
untenable position of a "capitalist critique of capitalism", because it
ignores the political dynamics at play.

The quintessential institution of capitalism—the _conditio sine qua non_
of this system—is property rights.  No rich person, no billionaire can
ever exist without the legal framework that supports and protects
_claims_ on tangible or intangible goods.  By "legal framework" we mean
more than a mere corpus of legislation, as it implies the presence of a
state apparatus with the capacity to both promulgate such laws and, most
importantly, enforce them by means of supreme political authority
(sovereignty).  Enforcement encompasses the use of force, which spans
everything from security forces, to courts, and prison systems.

This is why the notion of an unfettered free market is essentially
impossible.  Either you have an _instituted_ free market, which includes
at minimum the baseline of property rights and concomitant institutions,
or you have the rule of the jungle.  By the same token, I find the idea
of "anarcho-capitalism" to not only be a _contradictio in terminis_, in
that capitalism presupposes an _archy_, but also a fundamental
misunderstanding of how property rights can be maintained over the long
term _without the use of force_ or the permanent threat thereof.

Once we couch capitalist economics in terms of their underlying
politics, it no longer makes sense to argue along the lines of an
idealised free market, as if that were an objective benchmark by which
to compare degrees of capitalism.  We can go straight to the moral point
of whether we want _some_ individuals to hold far more power than
others.  The argument thus switches from economic criteria to power
relations between people.

The shift in focus is necessary to avoid the pitfalls of the capitalist
thinking on such magnitudes as so-called "efficient markets".  How can
you curtail a billionaire's power without hindering their presence in
the markets they partake in?  How can the polity, for instance, break
the billionaire status of Mark Zuckerberg while keeping Facebook in
tact?  The short answer is that this is not possible and that
corporations will have to be radically refashioned as well.  Which then
means that we will have to tear apart the fabric of legal persons to the
effect that one corporation cannot own others and, furthermore, that a
real person's ownership of corporations can only be limited in scope.

This line of reasoning means that we are no longer thinking in terms of
efficient markets per se.  Our goal is to contain the power of the
economic elite, so that we can avoid injustices in our daily life but
also the degredation of democracy into plutocracy.  To that end, we
would be willing to forgo some 'efficiency', though I disagree with such
narrow economistic concepts for understanding the complexity of the real
world, in favour of the greater good of preserving social peace and
abolishing the control of human by human.

I repeat: why bother with the whole capitalist or free market mindset if
your objective is to ultimately oppose it?  Why try to be a false friend
and in the process frame your thinking by categories you do not
recognise or indeed approve of as the midpoint of any debate on the
matter?

Moving on, I would suggest that capitalism presupposes inequality and
indeed an economic elite because it has always been the system whereby
all state interventions are aligned with the interests of capital owners
(yes, capitalism is a form of interventionism, the litanies of naive
neoliberals notwithstanding).  In practice, "capital owners" are reduced
to a select few that not only hold capital, but actually control the
very access to the industry at hand.  I call them "platformarchs".  They
are in charge of the _platforms_ on which all other economic activity
can be based on.  The platforms consist of critical infrastructure
and/or key intellectual property.  Platformarchs are not mere market
actors but enablers of the markets they participate in.  Think of how
Facebook and Google are the platform controllers of the advertising
business online.

Platformarchs exist in a symbiotic relationship with the state, both
because their power is an extension of the legal-institutional
architecture, but also due to the fact that the state finds it expedient
to maintain only a handful of major actors in any given industry.  A
two-tier system of oligopolies framed by _complementary_ market forces
(i.e. the capitalist order), makes the exercise of governance much
easier than having to wield power over a largely diverse, heteroclite,
heterogeneous whole.

Against this backdrop, the phenomenon of an economic elite amassing the
majority of the world's wealth is not an irregularity but an expected
outcome.  It also explains why the right wing forces, broadly
understood, have no trouble swinging from the [political centre to the
far
right](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-04-23-far-right-new-right/),
given the right circumstances.  The very design of the establishment
rests on the uneven distribution of resources which, at scale, produces
billionaires.  It follows that a capitalist case against this
concatenation of phenomena cannot actually be inherently _capitalist_.

Social democrats have always dreamt of managing capitalism in some
supposedly humane way.  And we have ample evidence to show that this
task is futile, since social democracy shares the exact same gigantist
principles as those of explicitly pro-capitalist forces, namely, that an
omnipotent state will ultimately be in charge of people's lives and that
everything will be controlled at the political centre.  I already
formulated an argument along those lines in yesterday's article on the
shortcomings of [technocratic
communism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-12-29-communism-technocracy/),
so please read that as well.

To press on the point of social democracy being gigantist, consider the
typical scenario of "guaranteeing jobs".  The state will go to great
lengths to ensure that a given capital owner, say, an industrialist
keeps their business activities within the national borders.  The
government will come up with all sorts of so-called "incentives" to
entice the industrialist, such as indirect payments, favourable
treatment, and even implicit state guarantees that result in outright
bail-outs in times of a major crisis.  Just think about the spurious
argument of "too big to fail" in light of "protecting jobs" and you
already have a social democratic, ostensibly "broad-based" as the
bureaucrats like to call it, recipe for preserving oligopolies.

The abolition of billionaires cannot be separated from the opposition to
inequality at-large.  It can never be formulated in terms of the
constructs it seeks to undo, nor can it be predicated on values it does
not share.  It must rather be defined counter to them: a revolutionary
power impulse that emanates from an outright anti-capitalist view of the
world.
