---
title: 'The extreme right is the new right'
subtitle: 'The conservative life cycle is in its authoritarian phase'
excerpt: 'The conservatives only care about defending capitalism. When it is expedient they are liberals, else they turn authoritarian.'
---

Virtually every day there some analyst raising the alarm about the surge
of the far-right.  While there is much to worry about, the phenomenon
itself should surprise no one who sees the bigger picture.  The
cumulative effect of social, economic, and technological change points
to the inexorable shift of conservative forces _rightward_, as they
enter the repressive phase of their life cycle.

To begin with, the ultimate telos of conservatives is the preservation
of the capitalist organisation of society.  Capitalism is the political
order that is designed to promote the interests of the capital owners;
where "capital" is "critical capital".  All legislation and every major
kind of state intervention conforms to this basic principle.

Capitalism is the system that serves the needs of the platformarchs, as
per my analysis [on gigantism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/).  The
platformarchs are not merely "capital owners", or "the rich".  They are
those who control vital resources, factors of production, intellectual
property, that are prerequisites to every field of endeavour in the
given industry.  Think of how the common business or private actor has
to use Google or Facebook to advertise themselves online.  Those two
mega-corporations are the platformarchs in this domain, to the point
where they function as de facto gateways to much of the worldwide web.

Conservatives pursue their end using a number of methods within the
spectrum that exists between liberalism and authoritarianism.  Their
approach is contingent on the secular trends in the economy.  In times
of perceived affluence, they move towards the political centre, using
liberalism as their vehicle.  But when things go awry, or when notions
of limitlessness to economic growth cannot be entertained, they turn
towards authoritarianism.  Either way, the goal is to preserve the
status quo.

The fiction of the "American dream" is a case of the conservative's turn
towards liberalism.  This is a time when people believe in the
cornucopia of capitalism: everyone can become rich, provided they put in
the effort.  All are invited into the United States to work hard and
live the good life.  Yet the same people who preach freedom have no
problem whatsoever propping up dictators such as Augusto Pinochet.  The
pretext is to combat the bugaboo of communism, while the ex post facto
rationalisation is that Pinochet introduces "market reforms".
Structural changes such as these are the basis upon which the new class
of platformarchs is established.

Now consider some more recent examples.  Take the EU, which touts itself
as a bastion of democracy, fundamental rights, and the like.  These are
the much-vaunted "European values" which are enshrined in Article 2 of
the Treaty on European Union.  The European values meant _nothing at
all_ when it really mattered, as European policy-makers did not hesitate
to force through austerity measures at all costs.  They supported
"technocratic" governments in Greece and Italy.  They pushed through
legislation under duress, such as when Greece had to adopt its third
bail-out package.  They stole bank deposits from Cypriot people in one
night, using measures that even the likes of Pinochet would feel jealous
about.  Then they named this outright theft a "haircut" as if people's
hard earned money grows on the back of their head.

The EU's metamorphosis at the height of the euro crisis should be all
the historical evidence we need.  Conservatives only care about
capitalism.  The rest are optional extras that are provided when the
establishment does not feel threatened.

## Overview of the prevailing conditions

With those granted, let us consider in outline form the prevailing
conditions in mature capitalist societies, to appreciate why
conservatives have to reveal their repressive nature.

* We witness an ever-greater concentration of wealth and concomitant
  power at the upper strata of the income distribution.  This manifests
  as a starker distinction between platformarchs and platformzens (as
  per my analysis [on gigantism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-02-27-gigantism/)).
  Oligopolies and de facto monopolies are the norm in virtually every
  field of work.
* The idea of a free market where all economic agents enjoy equal access
  to resources and opportunities is sheer fantasy.  An expedient lie.
  Societies are inherently unequal.  This is not just about income.
  There is a major divide between those relatively few who live in
  security and the many who survive in precarity, structural poverty,
  poor health and bad eating habits.
* Democracy gives way to plutocracy: the rule of concentrated wealth.
  There exists a symbiotic relationship between vested economic
  interests and the political establishment.  As a rule of thumb,
  politicians who wield considerable power are those who are favoured by
  powerful interests.  Democracy has already been usurped by an
  oligarchy that masks its machinations as "the will of the people" by
  using democratic customs such as elections.
* By and large, elections are a shadow play.  They offer the illusion of
  participation in the commons and give the impression of choice: Brexit
  or no Brexit, the elites will be supported, Trump or Clinton, the
  cronies will win, Nea Demokratia or Syriza, austerity will persist.
* Small political actors aside, politicians do not have an independent
  voice.  They and their parties are sponsored by the economic elite and
  have gained a life of their own, detached from any social base.  They
  exist to serve their partisan, clientelist interests, i.e. to finance
  the fancy lifestyle of their administration and assignees.
* Meanwhile, automation and robotisation decrease the demand for cheap
  labour.  Mass migration to bring down labour costs is no longer an
  absolute necessity.  Similarly, the replacement of humans by machines
  and/or software algorithms, has eroded the power of trade unions,
  while granting ever more control to the capital owners.  Hence the
  slow, but steady downfall of labour movements.  Their electoral base
  does not exist any more or is too insignificant to make any kind of
  difference.
* Thus collapses the age-old norm of industries trying to prop up their
  local communities.  There is nothing to be gained.  They become purely
  extractive instead, siphoning their profits across tax havens, leaving
  mass unemployment and impoverishment in their midst.
* Their extractive nature and fiscal engineering methods contribute to
  localised bubbles, such as in the real estate market and relevant
  financial derivatives.  Insiders gain from the boom, while the rest of
  society will ultimately suffer from the bust, in a variety of ways,
  such as through austerity measures, outright bail-outs to the banks
  and their friends, quantitative easing and other forms of
  unconventional monetary policy measures, aka _free money_, for
  banksters, etc.
* The support to insiders favours the rise of a new class of aspiring
  feudal lords, who capitalise on their gains by concentrating land
  under their ownership; land which is being eroded by the spread of
  gigantist thinking in farming, aggressive monoculture, and hubris
  towards the ecosystem and its natural constraints.

## Tyranny is normalised

Against this backdrop, the conservative forces know that they have
nothing to gain by clinging on to the tenets of classical liberalism.
Myths such as the "American dream" can no longer be entertained.  Only
the few live in _security_.  This is not about income: there still are
small- and medium- sized businesses that earn a lot of money.  The point
is that in an economic downturn they will lose most of it, whereas those
who are pampered by the state apparatus will come out unscathed.

What conservatives are now looking for is to reignite the politics of
false identities, traditionalism at home and jingoism on the
international stage.  They are a means of keeping the oppressed
precariat in awe: the best way to obfuscate the fact that the major
problems of our times are germane to the political order they maintain.

The far right's patriotic rhetoric is an invaluable asset to the
architects of the new right.  Whenever a problem arises, they can always
appeal to the people's sense of togetherness.  Solidarity with "our"
businesses.  Every authoritarian regime to ever exist has resorted to
this technique of externalising the problem in order to muster support
for their domestic policies.

In parallel, private actors with vested interests perform the function
of easing the transition from centre-right liberalism to far-right
authoritarianism.  Think of how mass surveillance has been normalised
through the oligopoly of data capitalism and how, along with it, the
private sphere continues to diminish.  Violating people's privacy used
to be the hallmark of tyranny.  Now it is popularised as a form of
convenience of calling the overlords of Amazon, Apple, Google, Facebook,
Microsoft to perform such mundane tasks as switching on your lights with
their AI.  No part of your life is yours any more.  The work of tyrants
could not have been made easier.

## Against gigantism

Conservative forces operate in cycles and are growing aware of the need
to move further to the right.  Classical liberalism is but a convenient
tool at their disposal.  A quasi-religion.  They follow its tenets when
they do not feel threatened by liberal thinking, else they are ready to
reveal their authoritarian side.

The shift rightward is part of conservatism's life cycle.  Under the
prevailing conditions, it is inevitable.  If there are any far-right
movements that are distinct from the main conservative party, it mostly
is to keep people trapped in false issues and dilemmas.  Enough with
this tale that "democracy" is under threat by extremists.  The
extremists par excellence are already in power.  They assiduously use
democratic symbolism to forward the agenda of preserving capitalism,
while they allude to the spectre of "extremist forces" to rally support
behind the establishment.  

As for the solution, I believe it cannot be found within the confines of
gigantist thinking.  We need a change of paradigm.  We must counter the
juggernaut with continuous, decentralised action, localism,
communitarianism, a return to the natural way of living.  We must become
one with our land.  Build our new institutions and inter-personal
relations of equality and genuine solidarity.  Let us become owners,
citizens, and guardians of our commons.
