---
title: 'Notes on the "Joe Rogan Experience" episode #1393'
subtitle: 'On being dubitative and inquisitive'
excerpt: 'Comments on the need for further research following the debate between James Wilks and Chris Kresser about "The Gamechangers" documentary.'
---

I watched with great interest the entirety of the _Joe Rogan Experience_
episode that features James Wilks and Chris Kresser talking about the
documentary _The Gamechangers_.  That is episode
[#1393](http://podcasts.joerogan.net/podcasts/james-wilks-chris-kresser-gamechangers-debate).
In this post I want to share some thoughts and observations with regard
to what I feel is an inconclusive debate.

In terms of appearances, James is the clear winner of the debate.  He
was more prepared, had references for all his arguments and, most
importantly, found Chris to be downright wrong on a number of issues.

Chris' own credibility started to fall apart when he admitted to not
know a particular research method: how to read a "forest plot".  This
made him look like a charlatan, which allowed James to attack him on a
personal level throughout the show.

When it comes to finding the truth though, we are ultimately interested
in the objective findings, not whether one side won over another in an
argument.  Did we get a _definitive_ answer?  Or are we still unaware of
a host of things that call for further research?

Despite reigning supreme in the debate, James failed to prove the crux
of his claim that meat is bad for you.  There can be inferences made out
of the available evidence, which may allow one to reach tentative
conclusions.  "Tentative" is the key word.  In the face of uncertainty
it is irresponsible to claim to know the truth with such unflinching
confidence.

The fact that James presents cutting-edge research does not, in and of
itself, mean that a definitive answer has been provided.  It just proves
that we are in a process of searching for the truth; a process that will
continue for several years to come; a process that might need to be
reviewed in the future just as all such research programmes hitherto
have been subject to further evaluation.

The point is to stress the importance of remaining dubitative and
inquisitive.

I am yet to be convinced that James' argument against industry-funded
research works in his favour.  Yes, the establishment will do whatever
it takes to forward its stratagems, making them appear as objective
science.  But why would this not also apply to the rising vegan
industry?  Are there no powerful interests there, who have a clear
agenda?

It seems to me as a new small-scale, ecosystem-conscious farmer that
uses no pesticides and chemicals, and who only employs polyculture and
similar nature-aligned techniques, that there are oligopolistic
interests on both sides of the argument.  Whether we are talking about
the omnivore industry or the vegan industry we are dealing with
corporations that follow the exact same capitalist principles.  Their
telos is gigantism in that they all have incentives to maximise profit
for shareholders and to dominate their industry in pursuit of that end.
None of them has in mind the well-being of local communities or indeed
the ecosystem at-large.

Speaking from my experience in the field of economics, specifically with
regard to the economic crisis in the euro area, the numerous allusions
to authority that James made do not amount to anything more than an
appeal to the orthodoxy.  Any heterodox view will of course not enjoy
the prestige of being represented at head of an Ivy League institution,
international organisations, etc.  This does not mean that the
mainstream is correct just because it has the appeal of being
infallible.  It just tells us which group is currently more influential
for reasons that are external to the theses themselves (social status,
exposure, etc.).

As a philosopher, I am concerned by the insistence on the micro scale of
nutrients.  I find it reductionist, potentially narrowing the
scientist's field of view, the scope of their inquiry.  Is a fruit, a
vegetable, a piece of meat just the sum of its nutrients?  Or are there
any emergent phenomena that can only be revealed by the interplay of
those micro elements in their specific combinations?  Has the relevant
science ever considered the possibility that the human organism evolved
over the millennia to understand different constitutions of nutrients in
their given proportions as carrying a specific meaning which triggers
certain chains of events in the body?

What I mean by this _speculation_ is that there may be an emergent
reality that goes unnoticed or understudied, due to the focus on the
micro foundations.  Emergent phenomena cannot be understood by looking
at the elements in isolation: you need to check the system they
comprise—to study it as such.

My speculation, a hypothesis for further research if you will, basically
amounts to this: _does the human organism understand meat as meat,
vegetables as vegetables, fruits as fruits, etc. and react to them on a
case-by-case basis?  Furthermore, do such possible triggers adapt to
combinations of these categories of food?_ Because if they do, then the
emphasis on nutrients and the concomitant claims of taking supplements
or whatever hyper-processed equivalent would seem to not be beneficial
for our longer term health.  Can we rule out the possibility that
nutritionism, the reductionist emphasis on nutrients, favours the vested
interests that produce supplements and, by extension, the vegan industry
as a whole?

Take the case of fake meat for instance.  I am referring to products
that vegans consume that are made out of intensively processed soy beans
yet are made to taste like meat.  Has there been any conclusive research
on the way the human organism reacts to the consumption of such
products?  When eating fake meat, does the body understand it as meat,
as soy, or as an unknown?  And what would possible misunderstandings or
false positives mean for one's overall health over the longer term?  I
do not think there can be any definite research on the matter, given the
relatively short time span such products have been in circulation.
Meaning that any claims on their much-touted benefits are based, at
least in part, on nothing but faith.

I do not purport to be an expert.  I am just pointing at the fact that
James never offered any compelling evidence to support his main thesis
that meat is bad for you.  He won the debate based on Chris' evident
shortcomings and on the fact that he alluded to authority, conflating
the orthodoxy with the objective truth.

What I take from all this is that with all said and done we remain
uncertain.  Meaning that we need to be calm and not draw far-reaching
conclusions based on the _imperfect information_ we currently have at
our disposal.

If you want my personal opinion on meat consumption, I as a non-expert
who claims no authority, think that it is bad for you for the mere fact
that those animals are maltreated and malnourished.  The same line of
reasoning, however, applies to the vegetables you eat, which are filled
with pesticides and chemicals, and which are produced in large monocrops
that destroy the ecosystem (e.g. threatening the survival of bees,
eroding the soil…).  The same goes for the air you breath, especially in
the big cities.  And so on.

We have piles of evidence on the egregious abuses of capitalist
interests in the food industry (capitalist interest in general).  The
vegan corporations have no plan to upset this order.  Their ambition is
to just place themselves in charge.  Now I understand this is not the
topic of the debate, but it is all too convenient to focus on the false
narrative of "bad meat industry versus good vegans" while ignoring the
social, political, economic factors that contribute to the destruction
of nature.
