---
title: 'On trust, global inter-dependence, and sustainability'
excerpt: 'Thoughts on the general features of the politics to cope with the pandemic and its associated issues.'
---

The pandemic has highlighted two truths about politics that are
otherwise easy to overlook, underestimate, or altogether ignore:

1. Political organisation rests on trust.  Without it we have no
   institutions, no law and order, no money, no morality, nothing.
2. Our lives on this planet are intrinsically inter-linked.
   Isolationism is an illusion, as you are never truly sheltered from
   externalities.

We know at least since the time of Thucydides (see the _Milean
Dialogue_) or Plato (refer to Book II of the _Republic_ on the Ring of
Gyges, etc.) that the human animal is contained and rendered moral by an
equilibrium of power.  What we experience as peace and prosperity is a
state where no person or group thereof is preponderant.  Otherwise we
default to the state of nature where everyone is left to fend for
themselves and their immediate loved ones.

The state of nature, which results in the Hobbesian war of all against
all (_bellum omnium contra omnes_), tells us something fundamental about
the lack of trust: that humans are predatory towards their kind when
their inter-subjective institutions implode (_homo homini lupus est_).

Institutions are at the risk of collapsing when a crisis hits.  This can
come in the form of a sustained economic recession, [civil] war, famine,
a pandemic, and so on.  What can arrest the downfall is either a remedy
to the exogenous source of tension, where applicable, or a more just
distribution of resources in an attempt to ease fears and appease the
passions.

Our world has yet to recover from the financial calamity that struck at
the end of the last decade.  We have gone through years of grinding
austerity that have put us all on the edge, while undermining the
viability of critical infrastructure, including public health services.

We live in a world which, according to the 2019 _Global Wealth Report_
[of Credit
Swiss](https://www.credit-suisse.com/about-us/en/reports-research/global-wealth-report.html),
is defined by its staggering inequality metrics:

> The bottom half of wealth holders collectively accounted for less than
> 1% of total global wealth in mid-2019, while the richest 10% own 82%
> of global wealth and the top 1% alone own 45%.

We cannot trust in the authorities to cater to our longer-term needs
when the measures to cope with this pandemic are, as with the sovereign
debt crisis and concomitant financial meltdown, not addressing the
egregious injustice at the core of the global world order.  People are
told to live in isolation and remain under- or outright un- employed
until further notice even though the precarious economic conditions of
most of us do not permit for such a "luxury".

There is no shortage of resources.  The problem consists in their
distribution.  Yet we pretend as if we have suddenly depleted all of our
stock and are on the verge of collapse.  Ideological obsessions, such as
conformity with neoliberal guidelines for "fiscal responsibility", must
be recognised as impediments to a genuine, lasting solution to the
impending downfall.  It would be a cardinal sin to have decision-makers
report "positive numbers" on the fiscal front while leaving people to
perish.

Pragmatism and a sense of urgency are in order.  Our world must rectify
its excesses, [its underlying hubris](https://protesilaos.com/hubris).
This eventually requires a rethink of the axiom that incessant, amoral
growth is a necessary blessing and that the profiteers know better.

We must also scrutinise the growing isolationist tendencies across the
planet.  In a globalised system, where capital can flow virtually
unencumbered from one nation to another, any serious action to improve
the distribution of burdens must come in the form of a concerted effort
between states.  No country can do this on its own: the economic elite
is shrewd enough to siphon its profits through some shady tax avoidance
scheme—they are doing it anyway.

Our inter-connectedness is also of a natural sort.  We share the same
habitat.  There is no "planet B".  Global phenomena such as climate
change or this pandemic recognise no border controls or whatever feeble
wall we may build for our selves to satisfy our delusions.  Our shared
humanity, our common presence as part of this planet's ecosystem, forces
us to think in terms of sustainability for the system at-large.  It is a
pernicious folly to pursue some isolationist agenda while thinking that
the calamity will somehow spare us.

Though border checks may be a necessary measure to temporarily adapt to
the realities of the virus, the longer-term objective must be to
formulate policies with a cross-border scope.  And such programmes must
have a clear emphasis on their humanitarian or even ecological
character.  To save lives, to preserve life, to empower communities in
the face of monumental transitions.

Capitalism has gone too far into toxic territory.  It has reached a
point where it generates—or greatly exacerbates—one crisis after another
in quick succession.  There is no reason to believe that things will
magically solve themselves while the power elite continues to enjoy its
massively privileged status.

Only fools will see the challenge of the present as a mere health issue.
Policies are woven together.  Our reality is a continuum that extends to
every aspect of life.  We cannot have effective health systems for all
when our governments operate in servitude to some chimera called
"austerity", which is but a euphemism for promoting the interests of the
oligopolies that control this world.
