---
title: 'On the appropriation of Europe'
excerpt: 'How a power elite is turning Europe into an instrument of imperialism. Concerted action between people is needed to turn the tables.'
---

On 21 September 2020, Christine Lagarde, the chief of the European
Central Bank delivered a speech at the Franco-German Parliamentary
Assembly titled [Jointly shaping Europe's
tomorrow](https://www.ecb.europa.eu//press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200921~5a30d9013b.en.html).
Lagarde's theme was in line with what the title implies and what one has
come to expect from central bankers, namely, how the ECB helps forward
the agenda of a more powerful political centre in the European Union,
casually passing the unprecedented upward wealth distribution that the
ECB's policies lead to as just another step towards a decisively
'European' future.

The symbolism of the event offers us stimulus for contemplation.
Lagarde, an elite Eurocrat at the helm of the most powerful technocratic
institution in the EU, addresses a body that is the vivid realisation of
the Franco-German tandem's ambition to effectively co-opt Europe.

The Assembly does not have competences of its own just yet.  Its role is
to provide guidelines to the respective governments, though students of
the history of the European integration process know all too well that
such is a common pattern that contributes to what I consider the
_obfuscation of the agent of governance_.

In Europe it is not immediately apparent "who governs".  There is
complexity, layers of decision-making that can only be rendered clear by
careful analysis.  That is so by design, as it actively hampers efforts
at setting up an antipode to the supranational establishment.  Citizens
cannot easily track the source of their problems and, thus, are unable
to act in a coordinated fashion towards enacting genuine reform.  Put
differently, it dilutes, confuses, and disrupts opposition to policies
that have a supranational dimension.  A profoundly anti-democratic
practice shrewdly wrapped up in democratic procedure and decorum.

The Franco-German Parliamentary Assembly is but one piece of the puzzle.
It must be examined in the wider context of the relations between France
and Germany and, in particular, how their governments operate
within---as well as outside the narrow confines of---the EU
architecture.  The Treaty of Aachen on Franco-German Cooperation and
Integration
([EN](https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/country-files/germany/france-and-germany/franco-german-treaty-of-aachen/),
[FR](https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/dossiers-pays/allemagne/relations-bilaterales/traite-de-cooperation-et-d-integration-franco-allemand-d-aix-la-chapelle/),
[DE](https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/de/frankreichs-beziehungen-zu-deutschland-osterreich-und-der-schweiz/bilaterale-beziehungen-mit-deutschland/der-deutsch-franzosische-kooperationsvertrag-von-aachen/)),
which entered into force in January of this year, is a clear statement
of intent.  The two countries have long coordinated their positions on
European affairs, especially ever since the economic crisis that started
at the end of the previous decade.  Equipped with this new legal
instrument, they are announcing to the rest of Europe their plan to
press on with moulding Europe in their image by exploiting the reality
of a multi-speed, multi-tier EU that advances through the practice of
differentiated integration (a process of policy harmonisation also known
as "variable geometry", which is formalised in the Treaties as the
principle of Enhanced Cooperation---think, for example, how the Euro
area is a union within the union, with its own rules and
particularities).

France and Germany are forming a united front on all matters of common
interest.  They can impose their will on the rest of Europe by picking
and choosing the necessary allies to each policy.  For that is what
enhanced cooperation is all about: a core group leads the initiative,
with others are told that they free to join at a later point, with the
proviso that they will accept whatever faits accomplis.

It, nonetheless, is false to think of this peculiar alliance as a mere
caucus of sorts within the decision-making platforms of the EU.  Their
cooperation can use European instruments when needed, though it can also
be bilateral in nature.  Many policies such as foreign policy and
military matters fall outside the exclusive competences of the Union.
The Franco-Germans can simply deepen their cooperation in those areas
and, once they have made sufficient progress, campaign to transpose
their established lines into European law, with the potential of
creating new institutions and/or modalities of rule formation.

Differentiated integration provides for the inexorable shift of
competences to the supranational level.  Given the complexity of the
overall edifice, this is not necessarily the EU proper.  It may be a
subset thereof, characterised by ad-hoc policies and emergent centres of
authority (e.g. how the Eurogroup became the de facto body for the
handling of the Eurocrisis).  What matters is the obfuscation of the
agent of governance, which allows the Franco-German tandem to assume the
role of the continent's hegemon without ever appearing to do so.

In this light, the EU is structured as a superficially federal system
whose locus of effective sovereignty is inter-governmental.  Within that
core, we then have the balance of power between the parties involved,
where France and Germany stand in a position of strength.  The rest have
conflicting agendas and, courtesy of differentiated integration, will
sometimes side with the Franco-Germans against other countries in the
'periphery' of core European power.  In one way or another, the
overarching objective of the Treaty of Aachen, that of empowering its
two signatories, is always met.

Returning to the speech of Christine Lagarde, let us think what
"jointly" means in the context of shaping Europe's tomorrow and couched
in terms of the aforementioned.  The European Central Bank is the
technocratic institution par excellence.  It is practically
unaccountable and wields peerless power.  In summary of what I analysed
at length in, inter alia, [ECB independence: concept, scope, and
implications](https://protesilaos.com/ecb-independence-review/)
(2017-04-02):

+ The ECB has a strong form of institutional independence, enshrined in
  Treaty law.  No body can influence its decisions and it is virtually
  impossible to change this state of affairs.
+ The ECB determines on its own what it means to conform with the Treaty
  provision for price stability.  It quantifies that as an inflation
  target that is below, but close, to 2% over the medium term, with the
  rate being measured against the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
  (HICP).
+ The ECB does not clarify what "medium term" is, nor does it account
  for price inflation in luxury goods or the sheer expansion of the
  money supply, which are typically not included in the basket of goods
  that ordinary inflation is about.  In practice, it does not consider
  price instability the expenses of Europe's most affluent spenders, nor
  does it factor in the suppression of wages and concomitant reduction
  of demand to the bare necessities (i.e. austerity) as key factors that
  keep the average price level low.  Put differently, it engages in
  class politics, revealing as naive the much-vaunted notion of money's
  neutrality over the long term.
+ The Monetary Dialogue is but a shadow play, a fig leaf that distracts
  us from the absence of true parliamentary oversight, as the European
  Parliament does not have authority to impose conditions on the ECB.
  It cannot establish an objective criterion or set thereof with which
  to gauge the performance of the ECB in accordance with its mandate
  (e.g. how many years does the "medium term" last, how close is "below,
  but close, to 2%", and what happens if the conditions are not
  satisfied).  Nor can it intervene in the decision-making processes of
  the ECB, perhaps to question the pro-wealthy assumptions that underpin
  these so-called "unconventional" monetary policies.
+ Speaking of unconventional policies, neither the European Parliament,
  nor any other body for that matter, can determine what is conventional
  and what is not, nor can it instruct the ECB to pursue a certain
  course of action.  Here "unconventional" just denotes the new normal
  or rather exploits a climate of crisis to usher in ever-more odious
  measures.
+ Inflation targeting, including quantitative easing and whatever other
  "unconventional" recipe the ECB has concocted, can never be neutral
  because those who are closer to the monetary source (banks and other
  mega-corporations) have a temporal advantage to use their newfound
  liquidity or capital (little difference in practice) to invest in
  conditions that are in their longer term interest.  The new money only
  reaches the real economy as a final step, once every other goal has
  been met, and always in the form of a bondage of interest.  The
  beneficiaries in this inter-temporal flow, the banks and
  mega-corporations, stand in an effective position of security and
  symbiosis with the official institutions, while the rest of the
  economy operate under precarious conditions.  The ECB sustains and
  amplifies the dichotomy between security and precarity, the privileged
  few and the unprivileged many.
  
Against this backdrop, we have Lagarde appearing before Europe's
aspiring hegemons to tell us how "we" are paving the way to a European
future.  The inattentive cheerleader or apologist of European
integration will hail this as another step towards federalism or what is
blithely referred to as "European Democracy" , while it is clear that
(i) there exists no homogeneous European demos that could formulate a
coherent programme for enacting change at the European level, and (ii)
even if such a demos exists in some form, it is not the one that
actively participates in the multi-faceted operations that determine the
overall state of politics in Europe.

We are getting ersatz federalism and a democracy manqué, while we are
being indoctrinated into thinking of some abstract European citizenry as
the agent of reform in the grand scheme of things.  In truth, we are
left near-powerless to act, as we observe elites ostensibly deciding
"for us"---a euphemism of forwarding _their_ interests---always in our
absence.

No central bank should ever be deciding for anything that is political
in nature and because money is inherently political, no central bank
should ever have the degree of independence the ECB enjoys.  The fact
that Christine Lagarde and her colleagues (and their predecessors) voice
such opinions in their official capacity, is a clear sign of regression.
The complexity of the European integration process has rendered us
incapable of discerning the patterns.  The engineered obscurity of the
overall project forces us into submission where we no longer set
ambitious targets pertaining to the very quality of democracy on the
continent.  It thus is to be expected that technocrats assume on their
own terms the role of expressing some imaginary sovereign will of "the
people".

It is this very appropriation of Europe that should concern us.  We are
giving away the very notion of a continent, the abstraction of a
culture, the symbol of Europa, to a power elite, as we are acculturated
into becoming a homogeneous citizenry only terms of being subjected to
the same class-conscious policies that repress our demands.  The likes
of Lagarde will tell you how righteous their pro-rich and undemocratic
machinations have been.  While the powers that be in France and Germany
will continue to brand themselves as the avatars of European unity.

Make no mistake: it is not the everyday French and German citizen that
is empowered by such appropriation.  The main beneficiaries of every
hitherto existing imperialism are the ruling classes.  The average
French and German person will continue to live in precarity and be
controlled by policies they have had no meaningful part in shaping.
Meanwhile, opportunists will exploit this state of affairs in an attempt
to reignite gigantism within the confines of the nation-state,
attempting to turn our angst against all the French and the Germans,
while never pointing their finger at the local overlords who themselves
have no problem forming pacts with their peers in France, Germany, or
anywhere else for that matter.

Our fight against this drift towards imperialism has to assume the form
of reclaiming Europe: the mythos, the symbol, the set of narratives.
This demands from us to look both inward and outward.  To reach out to
our fellow neighbours in order to coordinate our actions at the local
level, in pursuit of more egalitarian and ecosystem-friendly policies.
And to draw linkages between the place and the space, our domestic
struggles and those that unfold in our wider cultural milieu.  We must
organise ourselves on the principle of genuine solidarity and we must
seek to establish networks of like-minded platforms across the region.

The response to _the effective European Union_, that which stands as-is,
not the one fantasised by the people who operate in the Brussels bubble,
has to be just as variegated as the challenges we are confronted with.
Concerted yet locale-conscious action is necessary both at home, in our
immediate surroundings and their geographic boundaries, and wherever our
comrades are.  For the time being, the ones who closely cooperate are
those who appropriate Europe.

There has to be a day of reckoning.  It starts with each of us assuming
responsibility and escaping from the prison of egocentrism, to recognise
that we are potent only when we stand together and that we must find the
others.
