---
title: 'Crises, transnationalism, and the demi-state'
excerpt: 'The concentration of power is the root cause of the crises. Transnationalism is part of that problem.'
---

In an April 29, 2019 article titled [The Virus that Changed the
World](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/covid19-exposes-inadequate-nternational-system-by-joschka-fischer-2020-04),
Joschka Fischer highlights the shortcomings of the international
institutional architecture, while pointing at the supposedly pressing
need to rekindle the spirit of transnationalism.  As the author puts it:

> While nation-states will remain indispensable in providing good
> governance and contributing to global efforts, the principle of
> nationalism will only exacerbate future systemic crises.  The pandemic
> must be followed by a new age of international cooperation and a
> strengthening of multilateral institutions.  This applies to Europe,
> in particular.
>
> Now more than ever, we need to reclaim the spirit of 1945.  We need
> the twenty-first century’s two superpowers, America and China, to set
> the example, by burying their rivalry and uniting all of humankind
> around a collective response to the current crisis, and to those that
> await us.

While I agree that nationalism, made manifest through the centuries as
nation-statism (more on that later), is too limited in scope and cannot
cope with the challenges of a global magnitude, I am not convinced that
_more centralisation_ of power at the international centre is the
solution to our problems.

Fundamentally, the _crises_ we are facing, be it the pandemic, climate
change and ecological calamities, the Great Recession of the past decade
and the coming Greater Depression, can be understood as epiphenomena of
increased inter-connectedness, else inter-dependence.  Rather than
distributed systems that can remain robust to a range of shocks, the
human world is becoming ever-more monolith-like and fragile as a result.

The fact that our hospitals did not have even the basics in sufficient
stock is due to the neoliberal ideology that underpins the world's
legal-institutional order: the belief that global trade is sufficient to
deliver production on demand and everything should be outsourced.  So
the hospital in country A becomes dependent on the supplier in country B
and, therefore, is exposed to whatever shocks may emanate from the
prevailing conditions in that country.  A crisis in one area becomes
generalised by means of the sheer mechanics of the system.

More inter-dependence will only exacerbate the systemic nature of the
crises and will further amplify their invidious effects.  This is an
insight that us Europeans should have learnt from the peak of the
eurocrisis: a single currency area connects local economies in such a
way that a persistent downturn in one part is enough to pose an
existential threat to the common currency itself through a cascading
effect of widespread failures and bankruptcies, as well as
self-fulfilling prophecies in market expectations for identifying the
next weakest link in the chain.

In practical terms, Fischer's thesis can only hold true as an immediate
reaction to the challenges of the pandemic: the system cannot be
refashioned in one stroke amid the crisis and, therefore, no country can
reliably act unilaterally in the meantime.  Over the longer-term though
the genuine solution is to scrutinise and ultimately dismiss as
pathogenic the dogma that centralisation is a necessary blessing.

Which brings us to the false dichotomy between nationalism and
internationalism.  None of the two is appropriate, while they do not
stand in direct opposition to each other.  Nationalism was the first
step towards the rapid acceleration of inter-connectedness within and
then across borders, hence the _inter_ national world order.

The nation-state is the apparatus that consolidated power at the
country's capital, effectively establishing a technocracy with _elements
of_ democratic custom and majoritarian decision-making.  It is the
mechanism that pampered and reinforced the familiar two-tier system of
the capitalist power edifice, where a rentier class of platform owners
(I call them “platformarchs”) exists in symbiotic relationship with—or
as a de facto extension of—state structures, while the rest of society
copes with precarity and the vicissitudes of the business cycle
(i.e. they are handed generous bail-outs and privileges, while we get
grinding austerity and radical uncertainty).

In essence, nation-statism created a new class of corporate overlords
that are best understood collectively as **the demi-state**.  I define
it thus: the social class comprising private interests that are enabled,
supported, protected, or otherwise sustained by the state's acts of
sovereignty, which controls the entry points, critical infrastructure,
or other requisite factors of economic conduct, and which, inter alia,
provides state-like functions in domains or fields of endeavour outside
the narrow confines of profit-oriented production and consumption in
exchange for a legally-sanctioned oligopolistic privilege in the markets
it operates in.

Think of how cashless transactions that involve _private money_ in the
form of inter-bank payment systems allow the government to track market
activity by being integrated with the handful of bankers/operators in
this particular area of specialisation.  Or how tech giants are becoming
increasingly intertwined with surveillance corps (“security agencies”)
and partake in tacit foreign policy or even internal affairs through
cyber means.

The demi-state is the pinnacle of the capitalist system and the most
vicious monstrosity the nation-state ever established.  This is why
there needs to be a distinction, albeit analytical and academic in
spirit, between nationalism and nation-statism.  The former is a
romantic/idealist notion that never developed into a form of governance.
At its core, it is about being cognisant and supportive of one's
cultural identity.  Whereas the nation-state expanded on that idea by
interpreting three distinct magnitudes as consubstantial: the nation,
the state, the homeland.  For the nation-state, these three are the same
thing to which we often read commentary along the lines of "America
should do this" or "the Germans want that": it conflates the citizens
with the country, the land with the state, the government with the
people, reifying the resulting aggregate as an exalted transhuman entity
(also read my essay [Against the secularised theology of
statecraft](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-06-14-secularised-theology-statecraft/)).

Couched in those terms, national sovereignty is hypostatised as the
supreme political authority of a power elite in the nation's command
centre.  The lofty ideal of “we the people” is, in the nation-statist
worldview, realised as “we the few pretending to serve the people” or
even “us the chosen ones who embody the spirit of the nation”.  It is
this very disconnect, indeed absurdity, that has allowed the once
disparate national demi-states to extend beyond their borders and draw
linkages between them.  Or, to put it differently, the oligarchies
decided that inter-connectedness would forward their agenda and so they
pressed ahead without concern for side-effects that are always felt the
most by those who survive in precarious conditions.

As for the attitude of being pro-nation, nationalism properly so-called,
this is always exploited by the nation-statists whenever they want to
protect their interests.  Sometimes as outright racism.  Others as a
moral imperative.  Think of how it is a ‘national duty’ to bail out some
mega corporation—‘our’ companies—or to send people's children to die in
a far away land in pursuit of the master's imperialistic mania.

Again to bring an example that us European are well aware of: the
creation of the euro.  An elitist initiative which established the most
undemocratic institution that could ever exist in an ostensibly
democratic legal-institutional arrangement: the European Central Bank.
As explained in my ~4000-word essay from 2017-04-02 on [ECB
independence: concept, scope, and
implications](https://protesilaos.com/ecb-independence-review/), this
entity is practically immune to scrutiny.  No body, no institution, be
it national or supranational, can place conditions on the ECB or hold it
accountable for its shortcomings using objective criteria.  Moreover, no
authority has the power to redistribute resources upwardly across the
euro area.  None except the ECB, which is blithely channelling resources
to the privileged few, guaranteeing virtually limitless demand for the
assets of corporate elites, effectively shielding them from the forces
of the market, creating an uneven playing field, and putting them in a
position of strength from where they can plunder the forlorn with
impunity.

To this end, the dichotomy between nationalism and internationalism must
be re-framed in order to correspond to the actuality of things: it is a
continuum that maps differences in degree.  The internationalist mindset
is the same as that of nation-statism without being limited to the
borders of a single nation.  Put differently, it is nation-statism freed
from technical managerial constraints: faster travel, better
telecommunications, and all the technological means of escaping physical
limitations of yester year that kept logistics confined to a smaller
scale.

The case of the EU notwithstanding, we can already get a glimpse of the
technocratic features of such a superstructure by recalling the
observation that disproportionately powerful institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund or the World Health Organisation are
practically unaccountable.  Or how the United Nations is but a glorified
bureaucratic shadow play of rules-based global affairs that essentially
obfuscates the fact that not all nation-states are made equal (a point
that Joschka Fischer concedes).  Or how the internationalist demi-state
concentrates ever more power in its hands, while paying little-to-no
taxes by leveraging a network of preferential jurisdictions that enable
tax base erosion and fiscal engineering.  And, lest we forget, how all
this is expressed as an ever expanding chasm of inequality and an uneven
distribution of resources between countries and among social classes.

“Transnationalism” is a term that attempts to bestow a sense of
righteousness and enlightenment on the nation-statism and
internationalism that brought the world to where it currently is.  The
transnationalist will complain about the evils of nationalism and will
lament the rise of ‘populism’ while conveniently ignoring the fact that
it is the “spirit of 1945”, as Fischer puts it, that established the
first iteration of what later became the EU and that defined the
international architecture we are all familiar with.  No populist
bugaboo ever contributed to the inter-dependence of the world.  The
notion that some malevolent nationalists are undermining all the good
things that the international order offers is flatly incorrect (also see
my essay on [The shadow play of
“populism”](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-08-29-populism-shadow-play/)).

Alas, we have been indoctrinated into the belief that we must never
challenge the dominant narrative, for we run the risk of being labelled
a ‘nationalist’ or some of the other more sinister labels associated
with that term.  We are, in other words, brainwashed into seeing the
world in binary terms, where you must either be a transnationalist or
you are some nationalist scum.  Good versus bad.  No nuances.  No
possible permutations in between the extremes.  This is a pernicious
folly and the telltale sign of a humanity that has failed to internalise
the scientific ethos, the attitude of questioning, the spirit of being
tolerant by virtue of recognising one's overall ignorance, the need for
researching things and not accepting claims ex cathedra; the mark of a
world that is moving full speed into a new Dark Age of false certainty
[and hubris](https://protesilaos.com/hubris).

The answer to the crises does have a philosophical facet, in that it
requires us to think of complexity as such and to remain aporetic in the
face of the establishment's hypocrisy and conventional wisdom.  More
concretely though, what we need is to disinvest and decisively downsize
our operations: not just average me and you, but the insatiable
billionaires of this world—especially them!

Inter-dependence is unsustainable for humans and the rest of the planet.
We need to become increasingly _autarkic_ at the local community level.
Learn to cultivate our own land while relying on polyculture and
sustainable methods, produce our own sourdough bread away from the mild
poison that is industrial loaf, stand in solidarity with our fellow
people in our immediate surroundings, gain a sense of responsibility
towards respecting and safeguarding the ecosystems we are immersed in.

In short, we must shift from the arrangements of global inter-dependence
and personal irresponsibility to a network of largely independent
micro-centres of local participatory government and personal
empowerment.  This presupposes a thoroughgoing review of the principles
that underpin the current paradigm of production-consumption-ownership
and a direct opposition to the uncivilised moneyman of the capitalist
regime.

Joschka Fischer just echoes what many decision-makers and influencers
like him have failed to realise or otherwise admit: that their vaunted
beliefs are the root cause of the crises, not the much-touted panacea
they envision.
