---
title: 'On the underlying values of superhero culture'
excerpt: "Critique of the beliefs that are common in Hollywood's superhero stories and which serve to justify and exalt the status quo."
---

Culture embodies values and imprints them in the collective conscience
as models of acceptable or desirable states of affairs.  To think of
cultural artefacts as mere entertainment, a transient exhibition with no
further consequences, is to ignore the social-political function they
perform.  This is more so for works that are conceived, designed, and
delivered in a top-down fashion, where a handful of power elites wields
the authority to effectively dictate the narratives that inform the
quotidian life of people.

A case in point are Hollywood's superhero movies.  The tropes and
stereotypes they rely on and perpetuate are characteristic of the
underlying value system that their corporate overlords consider
appropriate for the preservation of their status qua overlords.

The abstract plot of a superhero story is that of the champion of all
that is good against the rapacious forces of evil.  While the hero's
backstory typically is a variant of two archetypes:

1. The benevolent billionaire.
2. The product of bio- or cyber- engineering.

## Making economic injustice likeable

We are told in one of those movies that the Batman's parents are the
ones who built the public transport network that connects the city where
the story unfolds.  There was nothing before it and, apparently, the
rest of the citizenry had no means to help themselves.  Perhaps because
some unjust political order preemptively deprived them of the resources
to fund such projects; resources that were instead redirected to the
coffers of some plutocrat?

That story hints at the philanthropic facade of real-world billionaires.
Just browse the list of the world's richest people to notice the
incredible coincidence of supreme power going hand-in-hand with bleeding
heart altruism.  As with the movies, there is never any question as to
whether this apparent philanthropy is genuine or some stratagem to
extract yet more value and to further consolidate the billionaire's
position.

Do those plutocrats, be it in our life or in the stories, employ every
trick in the books to erode their tax base, siphon their profits to some
jurisdiction that facilitates so-called ‘foreign direct investment’
(i.e. tax avoidance), and ultimately not pay their fair share?  What
about their political status overall?  Are they favoured by policies
such as lowered taxation, ‘incentives for investment’ that provide legal
loopholes to not make tax payments, a broadened interpretation of
copyright and patents laws which further empower their oligopolistic
grip in the industries they operate in, etc.?  And are such policies
funded by those same billionaires in the form of promoting their
political candidate of choice, controlling or influencing the media,
lobbying, and so on?  Are [those billionaires
platformarchs](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-12-30-capitalism-case-billionaires/)
exactly because of their symbiotic relationship with the state
apparatus?  Do they form part of [the
demistate](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2020-05-01-internationalism-localism/)?

There are no such concerns in the superhero movies, just as no-one is
supposed to ever scrutinise the motives of a billionaire's vaunted
philanthropy and “corporate social responsibility” , nor examine the
wider context in which it unfolds and is enabled by.  The story just
offers us a version of the world where the vast majority of humans have
no part in shaping; a world where the nexus of legal, political,
economic forces is presented as decisively external to those affected by
it.  It is a state of heteronomy where all that is instituted is touted
as a constant and a necessary good and where the subjects of that order
are conditioned into thinking of it as impossible to re-institute in a
manner that would be beneficial to everyone (also read my [Notes on
Rules](https://protesilaos.com/notes-on-rules)).

The superhero billionaire serves as a plausible fantasy of what the next
step of philanthropy is.  Is it not reasonable to expect whichever
real-world billionaire-philanthropist who is currently in vogue to care
for “the city and its people” by also buying or outright making those
cool gadgets, weapons, power suits that grant supernatural powers?  We
see here how the superhero model serves as a proxy of what money can do
when it is combined with noble feelings.  And since it is claimed by the
establishment that our world is replete with bleeding-heart moneymen, it
follows that they too are stalwart guardians of all that is good.  Ergo,
do not question the status quo.

## The ‘cool’ robotisation and weaponisation of the person

Same principle for the other category of superheroes: those whose powers
are either in large part or completely the result of the regime's or
some powerful institution's intervention in the human biological
constitution.  They are equipped with cybernetic enhancements or
engineered mutations and they act as weapons in the hands of the
establishment; an establishment that is not rendered clear, yet whose
underlying values are never questioned either.

In several of those stories we are told that scientists conduct
experiments on humans.  Who is funding those scientists to begin with
and what agenda does that programme serve?  In our real world, the
average scientist is either severely underfunded or has to receive
grants in exchange for working in a particular area of research that
ultimately benefits some mega-corporation or imperialistic end.  Think,
for example, of big pharma and big tech, or the military-industrial
complex.  In either case, the scientist no longer serves the principles
of objective inquiry into the world, but is instead instrumentalised
into forwarding the interests of their sponsors regardless of whether
they like it or not, understand it or not.

When it comes to realising the goals of some corporate actor, there
arises again the issue of where does that concentrated wealth come from?
Which brings us to the previous points about the billionaires.

If, on the other hand, it is some government programme that uses those
scientists to turn people into drones, we need to question its claims on
its legitimacy.  The regime always purports to serve its people, the
nation, the will of some divine authority, and so on (also read
[Communitarianism and the self-institution of
divinity](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2020-08-01-communitarianism-institute-divinity/)).
Its acts are supposed to be just and benevolent (see [Against the
secularised theology of
statecraft](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-06-14-secularised-theology-statecraft/))
and its intent is to mass produce soldiers for its cause.

What if the state is not just?  What happens when it operates as the
iron fist of a power elite that exploits the rest of society to preserve
its illegitimate status?  What if its wars on the other side of the
world are not just and that the real motive of such campaigns is to
further reinforce tyranny at home and abroad?

The fact that ‘scientists’ do the dirty preparatory work does not mean
that the end-product is necessarily good and desirable.  Nor that it is
value-free because some exaggerated objective method is in effect.  Here
we discern another pernicious meta-narrative of our era, that of
scientism.

Scientism derives from interlocking misunderstandings about the work of
science, all predicated on the assumption that the scientific enterprise
delivers objective and final truths and has all the answers.  Contrary
to what happens in reality, scientism presents the “expert” as the
indisputable authority in their field, whom none shall ever challenge.
By extension, that field of research only delivers propositions about
the world that are universally accepted.

In truth, science finds itself in a continuous process of research,
inquiry, review, and disagreement.  Scientists maintain distinct schools
of thought within their area of expertise.  Oftentimes one such school
becomes the mainstream paradigm, with or without external interventions,
or just because scientists are also human and remain subject to biases,
obsessions, tribalist patterns of behaviour, logical fallacies, and so
on.  There is, in other words, an enforced orthodoxy that decisively
marginalises heterodox positions; positions which are cast aside without
sufficient consideration in a non-scientific fashion.

What we can learn from epistemology and philosophy in general is that
science does not offer answers that are characterised by absolute
certainty and that disagreements should remain at the epicentre, else
science turns into yet another dogma.

Scientism remains limited to the phenomenality of science, stripping it
of its underlying ethical values: those that instruct the student of the
world to remain dubitative, inquisitive, dialectial, and plain-spoken
(parrhesia).  Instead it gives us ersatz science, a simulacrum that
tries to impress the audience by citing decontextualised numbers,
statistics, charts, and a bunch of awe-inspiring jargon, all of which
scream of objectivity and deontologically sound research.

Couched in those terms, the regime employs scientism as an intellectual
shield to fend off critics.  Who are you to question, say, the central
bank's policies that outright favour the banking establishment?  Do you
hold a PhD in monetary economics with a specialisation in this
particular subject?  If not, then your opinion is irrelevant.  If yes,
yours is still a fringe position, because the central bank has an army
of such PhDs who claim otherwise.

Linking this back to the superhero fantasy, we are indoctrinated into
thinking of weaponised and/or robotised humans as ‘cool’ and ‘badass’.
As with the case of the benevolent billionaire, we must accept the
instituted world as-is.  We are made to believe that the state is there
to tend to our needs, and that the humanoid drones that ‘science’
unscrupulously engineers are just fancy forms of life that serve some
higher cause of justice.

## The citizen manqué

There is another logic to the whole superhero craze that the Hollywood
establishment promotes: that of the passive subject of the polity.  In
those stories the people have no role in moulding their inter-subjective
experience to suit their needs and aspirations.  They are just there to
serve as the backdrop of the story, cannon fodder, or the age-old
pattern of some damsel in distress.

The superhero world is one of elitism.  Only a select few have the means
to exercise some degree of control, while a tiny minority pulls the
strings.  The rest lack the means to enact any kind of reform.  Citizens
appear to have no agency, no collective will to take matters into their
own hands, form associations based on solidarity, establish parallel
economies that circumvent the capitalist oppression, and ultimately
self-organise in ways that abolish the control of human by human.

The superhero fantasy is the manifestation of the power elite's ambition
to impose slavishness from the top.  To impress upon the average
fellow's mind a sense of powerlessness and desperation.  It all comes
down to turning the citizen into a citizen manqué who basically is
little more than a compulsive consumer and the cash cow that the state
and demistate exploit with impunity.

To change the world we must be prepared to challenge the prevailing
narratives, to deface every idea that finds currency; ideas whose
advocates maintain hidden agendas for or have clear incentives to impose
some form of tyranny with.
