---
title: 'More ECB QE will not stop the Coronacrisis'
excerpt: 'The European Central Bank cannot stop the impending economic crisis by means of liquidity. We need debt monetisation.'
---

On March 19, 2020 the European Central Bank announced a new round of
asset purchases (Quantitative Easing or QE) that are specifically
intended as a response to the economic downturn caused by the
coronavirus pandemic.  From [the
announcement](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2020/html/ecb.blog200319~11f421e25e.en.html):

> […] the ECB’s Governing Council announced on Wednesday a new Pandemic
> Emergency Purchase Programme with an envelope of €750 billion until
> the end of the year, in addition to the €120 billion we decided on 12
> March. Together this amounts to 7.3% of euro area GDP.
>
> […]
>
> We are making available up to €3 trillion in liquidity through our
> refinancing operations, including at the lowest interest rate we have
> ever offered, -0.75%. Offering funds below our deposit facility rate
> allows us to amplify the stimulus from negative rates and channel it
> directly to those who can benefit most. European banking supervisors
> have also freed up an estimated €120 billion of extra bank capital,
> which can support considerable lending capacity by euro area banks.

While the ECB's response signals an eagerness to cope with the unique
challenges the euro area faces, it suffers from a fundamental flaw in
its approach to crisis management: it seeks to stem an insolvency crisis
by means of expanded liquidity.  This is the same misreading of the
situation that (i) amplified the euro crisis during the previous ~10
years, and (ii) forced the ECB to engage in de facto fiscal policy that
evidently fails in its stated end of boosting inflation to the desired
levels.

To remind ourselves: QE is deemed necessary to fill in a void that is
left behind by the concerted cuts in aggregate demand imposed by euro
area Member States (simultaneous austerity).  When spending collapses,
the pressure on longer-term inflation rates is downward.  Such a trend
discourages investments, as persistent disinflation or outright
deflation will entail losses while creating an environment of
uncertainty and low expectations (i.e. more potential losses).
Meanwhile, the ECB is mandated to preserve price stability, which the
institution itself has quantified as a rate that is _below but close to
2% over the medium-term_.  I have analysed this latter notion, and its
concomitant issues, in my ~4000-word essay from 2017-04-02 on [ECB
independence: concept, scope, and
implications](https://protesilaos.com/ecb-independence-review/).

The idea of QE is to provide sufficient capital to large corporations,
typically financial institutions, _in the hope_ that the money will
trickle down to the real economy.  Such a phenomenon should eventually
be reflected in the inflation rate which, despite the trillions in asset
purchases, [remains persistently
below](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/html/index.en.html) the ECB's
medium-term target.

QE cannot guarantee an upward inflationary trend, _ceteris paribus_,
because asset holders find it expedient to use their newfound resources
to invest in luxury goods instead of directing funds to households and
businesses.  The new trillions never reach the real economy: they are
used in speculative endeavours that are not tracked by the Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), such as lucrative contracts for
footballers (prices in the European football industry have been
exorbitant in recent years), yachts, paintings of dubious aesthetic
value that are auctioned for ridiculous sums, etc.

Put differently, QE offers nothing but the impression of a return to
normality.  It actually aggrandises debts and increases systemic risk,
whose extent will only be fully revealed in the next financial crisis.

The fact of the matter is that the euro area never fully recovered from
the previous crisis.  The feeble positive signs where just a reflection
of heightened ECB activism, rather than an indication of strong
fundamentals.  To use pertinent medical language, if you live off of
supplements, you are dealing with an underlying health issue.

More QE means more of the same package of measures that has clearly
failed to boost aggregate demand and put inflation rates in line with
the ECB target.  In an insolvency crisis no amount of liquidity will
suffice to arrest the downfall and bring things back on track.

What is now needed is an altogether new mindset that will break free
from the ideological constraints that have prevented European
policy-makers from rational policy action.  We need a genuinely
unconventional response from the ECB and the Member States (coordinated
via the Eurogroup, European Council, etc.).  The core objective should
be to monetise sovereign debts, allow governments to engage in
large-scale expansionary fiscal policy that is commensurate with the
debt monetisation scheme, and set price controls for practically all
consumer goods.

The goal is to channel resources directly to the real economy at a time
when economic activity has effectively stalled (the other option would
be "helicopter money").  Households should witness a tangible difference
in their purchasing power which, in turn, will send aggregate demand on
an upward trajectory.

It is of paramount importance to tackle the coronacrisis at its root,
otherwise the recession will transmogrify into an economic meltdown of
colossal proportions.

A blueprint for such drastic measures has already been offered by Mario
Draghi's policy initiative following his famous "whatever it takes [to
save the euro]": the Outright Monetary Transactions.  OMT was a debt
monetisation plan linked to a programme of the European Stability
Mechanism.  In principle, Member States can use Enhanced Cooperation to
employ EU institutions, such as the ECB, in the pursuit of policy
initiatives that are outside the remit of the European Treaties though
aligned with them.  In effect, it is possible to circumvent any legal
constraint on debt monetisation in order to save both the average
European citizen and the EU/Euro architecture.  This is with the proviso
that policy-makers rise to the challenge of this unique historical
occasion.

There is no such thing as a legal obstacle to survival.  The challenge
we Europeans have always been confronted with is to find ways of
escaping from the shackles of pernicious ideology.  It is ideological
narrow-mindedness that guided policy-makers to blithely exacerbate the
eurocrisis by imposing grinding austerity amid a general collapse in
aggregate demand.  It is ideology that keeps the ECB captive in this
role-playing game of trying to help the real economy while actually
sponsoring the speculative bonanza of unscrupulous investors.

Unlike the timing of the eurocrisis, the coronacrisis comes at a point
where our economies and the welfare state have already been devastated
by years of misguided austerity.  Those in power must be immediately
challenged to reconsider their mindset, emancipate themselves from the
path-dependency of their past policy initiatives, and act in the
longer-term interest of Europe at-large.  Else I fear we will suffer
much—MUCH—more than we already have.
