---
title: 'On the contradiction of non-interventionism'
excerpt: 'Analysis of the contradiction inherent to classical liberal thought with regard to non-interventionism.'
---

Reading Ludwig von Mises' lecture notes on [Politics and
Ideas](https://mises.org/node/53798) reminded me of the contradiction
that is present in classical liberal thought or within certain
libertarian circles: the idea that a government committed to
laissez-faire is either (i) not political, (ii) somehow less political
than its opposing forces, or (iii) political yet objectively correct.
The contradiction takes the form of a deeply ideological yet ostensibly
unbiased double standard where certain types of government regulation
are deemed appropriate and, thus, do not qualify as much-maligned
"interventionism", while others are treated as necessarily evil,
inefficient, or corrupt and, hence, interventionist; a distinction that
collapses into itself in practice.

Mises notes:

> Under interventionist ideas, it is the duty of the government to
> support, to subsidize, to give privileges to special groups. The idea
> of the eighteenth-century statesmen was that the legislators had
> special ideas about the common good. But what we have today, what we
> see today in the reality of political life, practically without any
> exceptions, in all the countries of the world where there is not
> simply communist dictatorship, is a situation where there are no
> longer real political parties in the old classical sense, but merely
> pressure groups.

While the identification of political parties and, by extension,
ideologies with pressure groups does seem plausible, the notion of "real
political parties" hints at an idealised era in which such entities and
their underlying values were neither governed by minority concerns nor
catered to parochial interests.  We are led to assume that those "real
political parties" laboured to promote nothing more than the general
good: a magnitude that is supposed to be both unambiguous and decisively
different from the interest of any particular pressure group.

For reasons that remain obscure, those same entities that once strove
for the wellness of the whole changed into their conceptual alterity:
they lost sight of their original cause as stewards of the common good
and became interventionist.  Could it be that they always were that way?
They always served special interests and, for whatever reason, had to
make further concessions towards other groups in order to retain their
grip on power?

Unless we can identify a clear cause that turns "real political parties"
into mere "pressure groups", we have no reason to stand by this romantic
view of the world of yester year.  We are also not compelled to provide
credence to this narrative by virtue of the absence of evidence on there
being such exalted political entities; parties "in the old classical
sense" that partook in enlightened governance without ever being tempted
into reaping the short-term gains of clientelism.

Rather than start from a hypothesis of a once perfect world that has
since declined, let us acknowledge the imperfect nature of the human
being.  We have our character flaws as individuals: we are tricked by
biases, we sometimes cannot help but let our passions take over rational
thinking, we act in accordance with our instincts when the need arises
without observing the ethical framework that informs the zeitgeist.

The individual's imperfections spill over into the world of ideas in
general and politics in particular.  For the most part, humans operate
under conditions of uncertainty.  They are not sure about what the best
course of action is, in no small part because they lack the means to
interpret the interplay of contributing factors to emergent phenomena.
They lack perfect insight, else omniscience.  Scientists, philosophers,
engineers, artists, all have opinions---justified and informed, yet
opinions nonetheless---about their respective field of endeavour;
opinions that they typically evaluate using methods that appear to be
appropriate for sorting out falsehoods.  Areas were complete certitude
can be asserted are fairly few and narrow in scope.

[ Read: [The Dialectician’s
Ethos](https://protesilaos.com/ethos-dialectic) (2020-09-30) ]

The world of politics is replete with contradictory views.  Those who
live on the borderlands may have a greater interest in foreign policy
vis-à-vis the neighbouring country than those who reside further in to
the hinterland and who have no experience of life on the border or lack
information about its day-to-day reality.  Those who have been exposed
to physical abuse, domestic violence, or bullying may be more sensitive
to such issues than the ones who are ignorant about the matter.
Individuals with the same background may still react differently to
stimuli, meaning that people from the same locality or group may not
necessarily occupy convergent lifeworlds.  And the same for all other
scenaria.

Differences of opinion also arise from the scale in which
decision-making unfolds.  If the affairs of some village are ultimately
decided by bureaucrats in the capital, then there is a good chance that
the bureaucrats are not accounting for the specifics that hold true in
that milieu because their role, their mandate and institutional outlook,
is to cater to some broader interest.

[ Read: [Notes on Rules](https://protesilaos.com/notes-on-rules)
(2020-07-01) ]

This is about the principle of subsidiarity and the vertical separation
of powers in which decisions should be adopted as close to the citizens
as possible: so village affairs are to be determined by the villagers,
regional issues by the region's authorities, and so on.

Subsidiarity is an appealing proposition, yet it cannot be applied as
elegantly in practice when the scale of the polity contains strata that
are far removed from any particular locality.  There will always be
cases where some higher stratum's policies have permanent effect on
lower strata, such as a periphery's plan to build a road network which
in turn limits the possible courses of environmental action in a given
community that is disproportionately affected by the new infrastructure.

Subsidiarity is, in essence, a principle that must be interpreted in
light of values that underpin modern statehood: internal homogeneity,
territorial and legal-institutional integrity.  In ideal terms,
nation-states safeguard their unity by balancing out the good of the
place (some locality) with the good of the space (the nation at-large).
This holds true for aspiring nations such as the European Union, whose
idiosyncratic federal system is meant to at once promote a sense of
"Europeanness" while respecting the diversity of Europe's people and, in
particular, while forming its rules through inter-governmental
mechanisms.

[ Read: [On the appropriation of
Europe](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2020-09-28-appropriation-europe/)
(2020-09-28) ]

Banal nationalism and the modest or tacit Europeanism of present day
Europe rest on the belief that a people can (i) be conceptualised as an
indivisible whole, (ii) that such an entity can have a singular
aspiration that those in power may themselves discern and express, and
(iii) policies in pursuit of this common interest do not undermine or
otherwise frame in a negative way the well-being of those
yet-to-be-expressed, as in the case of inter-generational affairs.

Perhaps with the exception of some communities and micro nations, all
states in the world have populations that are characterised by varying
degrees of diversity.  Those differences may be cultural, educational,
social, economic, ideological, situational.  For there to be a "national
interest" or common good, well-meaning authorities must exercise
discretion by labouring under the assumption that some abstract _simile
in multis_ is present within the population and that such a pattern is
what is genuinely representative of the citizenry as such.

While the conduct of accommodating competing agendas may be a
prerequisite to governance, it nonetheless entails the probability of
discriminating against certain niches in pursuit of some estimated
average opinion.  For our purposes of entertaining Mises' assumption,
let us grant that such discrimination is neither ideological nor
premeditated and that it only follows from the very mechanics of
treating a diverse group as if it were homogeneous.  Even with such a
brave hypothesis we cannot afford but acknowledge that those in power
may well be enabling some pressure group's stratagems, such as by
preferring the interests of those who benefit from, say, the single
market and common currency that the state imposes upon its subjects.

Even if the common mind is sometimes possible to be expressed, we have
to account for the complexity of the world.  Suppose that a unified
defence policy is to the benefit of all groups that make up the body
politic.  Consider, further, that this policy requires the maintenance
of a standing army.  As an army's morale is of paramount importance to
its effectiveness, shrewd governors will seek to implement measures that
are not strictly about defence, yet can be conceived as contributing to
the overarching objective of operational military efficiency.  Those can
be the instruction of a common language, or the formulation of a titular
narrative such as in the form of a single religion or secular doctrine
that encapsulates the vaunted essence of the political whole's unity.
This top-down homogeneity may be instrumental to the realisation of the
general interest in effective defence, yet it inevitably undermines or
otherwise works against other issues like cultural diversity.

[ Read: [Against the secularised theology of
statecraft](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-06-14-secularised-theology-statecraft/)
(2019-06-14) ]

However one goes about it, the conclusion is that the "real political
parties" are a chimera.  Mises' prior truth is but an expedient story to
provide credibility to the claim that civilisation is experiencing a
decline which is caused by resurgent interventionism and which, in turn,
is due to the transformation of the once-true political parties into
associations of lobbyists.

The point is that there is no practical way in which a fairly large body
politic is ever expressed uniformly, not just for one issue in a given
moment, but for all matters that affect it over time.  It thus follows
that all policies necessarily involve a degree of arbitrariness and that
even well-meaning officials will inadvertently disadvantage some
constituency over others in any given domain of decision-making.

Democracy was never conceived as a system where an enlightened elite
expresses the general good.  It rather was predicated on the realisation
that through continuous compromise in the Ecclesia (Athens) or Apella
(Sparta), formalised as the political process, all citizens who enjoyed
equal status could balance out their competing interests over the long
term.  An imperfect system that was deemed better than other yet more
imperfect systems of the time.

Which brings us to the very notion of interventionism.  Before we
proceed, however, let us revisit Mises' claims on the topic:

> It was not the idea of the eighteenth-century founders of modern
> constitutional government that a legislator should represent, not the
> whole nation, but only the special interests of the district in which
> he was elected; that was one of the consequences of interventionism.
> The original idea was that every member of the legislature should
> represent the whole nation. He was elected in a special district only
> because there he was known and elected by people who had confidence in
> him.

We have already argued that representing the whole nation is both
practically impossible and does not necessarily ameliorate the
ostensible innate faults of interventionism.  Those representatives may
still have to discriminate against certain particular interests in their
quest to pursue the often elusive or outright arbitrary common good.

Now suppose that none of the above holds true and that Mises is right
that interventionism is the force that inwardly corrupted constitutional
government.  What is interventionism?  And, conversely, what exactly
does non-interventionism entail when couched in terms of such a
constitutional political order?

Non-intervention would amount to the absence of regulation by the
government.  No government policy should determine any sphere of life.

+ Should this principle apply universally?  If yes, then the government
  has no reason to exist, because every single law is, in effect, a
  medium through which the rule-makers seek to form reality in
  accordance with their will rather than letting it develop organically.

+ If some degree of interventionism is to be allowed, then we must
  necessarily create a classification of areas of policy where a few of
  them are presumed to be more important than others in that they merit
  government initiative to render them possible or desirable.  Who
  decides what those policies are and why is this meant to be an
  objectively correct or politically neutral course of action?

Strictly speaking, non-interventionism either (1) leads to the kind of
anarchy that annuls the sort of constitutional government Mises refers
to, in which case the entire mythology of a golden age of "real
political parties" becomes irrelevant, or (2) it introduces profoundly
ideologically driven arbitrariness under the guise of vague concepts
like the "national interest" in which special pressure groups stand at
the receiving end of favourable policies under the pretext that they are
pillars of that presumed national unity and wellness.

Anarchy would itself qualify as a kind of variagated interventionism in
the sense that all political conduct involves purposeful concerted
action to regulate inter-personal or inter-subjective affairs in
accordance with certain principles or in pursuit of ends that would not
have been observed or hypostatised in the absence of politics.  Anarchy
is political throughout, though our argument here is that Mises'
non-interventionism would annul 18th century constitutional government
once implemented faithfully---so it does not support his thesis.

As for the tacit ideocentric disposition of non-interventionism that
favours special interests, let us revisit the example of the common
defence policy.  Suppose that decision-makers have qualified defence as
worthy of government intervention while they otherwise remain committed
to a non-interventionist form of governance.  Now the government wants
to raise and maintain a standing army.  Should it not, for matters of
homeland safety, also support the industries that produce arms?  And
what about the protection of critical infrastructure, such as airports,
roads, power plants?  Those must be instrumentalised as well.  Same for
the control over key resources like oil or natural gas.  Extend this to
espionage and diplomacy, which inevitably influence international
trade...  Before you realise it, the government's pursuit of the
"national interest" in defence policy can only be implemented as a
series of exemptions and favourable deals for particular pressure
groups.  All while rendering void and meaningless the claims on the
overall non-interventionist outlook of policy.

The theorist who expounded on the merits of non-interventionism _in
vitro_ will never be able to criticise non-interventionism _in vivo_
when catch-all concepts such as the general good or the national
interest are part of the equation and actually guide political
discourse.  It simply is naive to grant one virtually limitless power as
well as a blank check they can cash in at any moment and expect them not
to abuse such privilege.

Mises' tenuous propositions notwithstanding, there exists a more subtle
problem with the arguments in favour of non-interventionism.  They rest
on the presumption that the status quo ex ante is a good starting point
to roll back government interventions and that whatever injustices will
be corrected organically.  In other words, the structural aspects of the
human world are altogether disregarded or not given sufficient
consideration.

Think, if you will, of land ownership.  And suppose that the government
stops implementing all policies that contributed to the concentration of
property in the hands of a few economic overlords.  Consider then that
the government also repeals all legislation that pertains to labour
rights.  All the government is left to do is treat property rights as
sacrosanct.  The landless will have to work for the land owners, while
the latter will be in a position to impose odious working conditions,
employ thugs that kill any attempt at unionisation at its birth, and,
generally, behave ruthlessly in their exploitation of the workers.  In a
system where interventionism is possible, the oppressed can at least
hope that they may influence the government to do something in order to
ease their pains.  In the absence of such an option all they are left
with is the course of bloody revolution.

It may be argued that the landed gentry would have a rational interest
not to exploit its workers and not push them over the edge.  While
interesting, there is no reason to believe in the likelihood of such a
hypothesis especially in light of the history of economic relations, the
current working conditions in the Global South, the overall precarity of
living standards in so-called "advanced economies", and the misconduct
of mega-corporations both towards their employees but also with respect
to the ecosystem.

In _Politics and Ideas_ Mises fails to appreciate the peculiar brand of
interventionism that defines capitalism: state intervention in favour of
capital owners and, in particular, platformarchs.  This is the kind of
intervention that is conceptualised by apologists of the establishment
as ideology-free despite the fact that it follows from the arbitrary
classification of areas of policy into those that should be instituted
through legislation and those that should remain "hands off".  The
doctrine of laissez-faire economics and concomitant governance rests on
this arbitrariness, such as in its argument for the rule of law in the
preservation of private property parallel to its offensive against
labour rights and other such "impediments" to "unfettered" business
operations.

[ Read: [On platformarchs, the demi-state, and
deplatforming](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2021-01-26-platformarchs-demistate-deplatforming/)
(2021-01-26) ]

Notions of "crony capitalism" or "corporatism" are often used to
describe the modern world's economic order.  While they do denote some
kind of corruption or decadence, they too hint at a mythicised golden
age in which capitalism was not plagued by those evils; a capitalism
where markets were free and everyone was happy...  That paradise on
earth never existed, unless we count the enrichment of colonists as
"free market" when they appropriated the land of indigenous peoples all
while engaging in slave trade.  The same colonists who were subjects of
vast empires that actively exploited large parts of the world.

This is not to suggest that Mises would have argued in favour of such
historical events.  It rather is an attempt to highlight once again the
indifference of non-interventionist theorists on the status quo ex ante
and how they wish to dissolve present injustices through means whose
adequacy is questionable at the outset.

It is true that a government wielding its resources in the benefit of
pressure groups is inevitably discriminating against other groups which
can, inter alia, mean that it distorts what could have otherwise
happened in the economy.  It is also true that non-intervention may help
calcify existing inequality and its accompanying unjust structural
distribution of power.

In which case we have two broad options: (1) either we embrace anarchy
and acknowledge that politics might potentially evolve without any
obsession on economic efficiency as a brand of communitarianism and
localism outside the confines of the eighteenth-century-style
constitutional government (i.e. nation-statism) or (2) we accept
interventionism as an epiphenomenon of politics and put our efforts into
recalibrating our political order so that collective life results in an
equilibrium between competing interest groups, which implies more
interventionism, though this time decisively against platformarchs.
