---
title: 'On platformarchs, the demi-state, and deplatforming'
excerpt: 'Analysis of the principles underpinning a rules-based polity and why the demi-state is a threat to such a system.'
---

The rule of law with fundamental rights rests on the distinction between
public and private spheres, while recognising common and personal goods
(_res publica_ and _res privata_).  The rights of an individual are
protected against infringements from other persons and are equally
guarded against violations from the state: the apparatus that operates
in the name of the public good.  As such, a rules-based system that
enshrines fundamental rights for its subjects has as its telos an
equilibrium between the wants of the person and those of the collective.

In concrete terms, one cannot be alienated from their right to free
speech by the unilateral act of another person, for that would undermine
the principle of equality between the two in the face of the law.
Similarly, the state cannot apply double standards on who may enjoy a
given liberty, because such intervention disturbs the balance between
the affected groups, but also invalidates the distinction between public
and private spheres _ceteris paribus_.

What limits the scope of a right---indeed any law---in such an order is
the presence of other laws which are also promulgated in accordance with
the aforementioned dichotomy of the public or private good.  Rules with
conflicting provisions that may apply to a given case are meant to
balance out the well-being of the individual with that of some larger
collective.  In the case of free speech, for example, prohibitions on
the incitement of violence are considered just grounds for the
limitation of one's right, exactly because the wellness of the whole
needs to be accounted for when assessing the propriety of one's act.

There is no boundless freedom nor unlimited authority in a rules-based
order that safeguards fundamental rights.  Too much individual liberty
comes at the cost of potential injustice for categories of citizens,
while disproportionate state power can quickly lead to abuses and,
ultimately, authoritarianism.

Phenomena differ and such matters are subject to interpretation.  No
legal framework can foresee all possible permutations between the
extremes that may be envisaged in statutes.  It thus falls upon the
judiciary to exercise discretion in its evaluation of the factors that
constitute each case and, in doing so, redraw the context-specific
delineations between public and private spheres.  Judges are themselves
bound by such instruments as procedural law, but also by rules of
custom.  Technicalities notwithstanding, their authority is neither
absolute in scope nor immediate and uncontested in its application.

## The demi-state poses a challenge to the rule of law

Against this backdrop, we may investigate the legal-political status of
_platformarchs_.  Those are private actors who own critical
infrastructure, foundational physical and/or intellectual property, or
any other resource that constitutes a prerequisite to either the entry
of an enterprise in to a given industry or its continued operation as a
competitive entity.  Platformarchs are in control of the very foundation
upon which the given market sector is based on and, consequently, they
do not merely _participate_ in those economic activities but outright
_enable_ them.

This position of strength and privilege means that platformarchs can
pursue the continuation of state interests through private means, by
virtue of providing ancillary or primary facilities to the instituted
authorities.  For example, private money in the form of cashless
payments that have to go through the oligopoly of the banking system,
grant the state access to superior tools for monitoring transactions
which can, in principle, be used to profile individuals for policing
purposes, but also tax them with greater precision, with other nefarious
courses of action not ruled out of the domain of possibility.

The state, by deviating from the social contract of a rules-based system
with fundamental rights, benefits by propping up platformarchs: it makes
its reach wider and its machinations more effective, albeit increasingly
sinister.  In return, those presumed business people enjoy the unique
benefit of living under the impervious shelter of implicit or
occasionally explicit sovereign guarantees on their economic endeavours.
Just as a "systemically significant" bank is deemed "too big to fail"---
an admission of such guarantees entering into force---so are all
platformarchs protected from the vicissitudes of the business cycle and,
thus, from genuine competition.

There being platformarchs means that the much-vaunted notions of free
markets do not have universal application.  So called cut-throat
competition does exist on top of the platforms, though not for the
platforms themselves: they are always there, establishing the two-tier
economy, the innate double standard, of the capitalist world.

Which leads to the realisation that the neat dichotomy between public
and private spheres fails to account for the reality of what I consider
the _demi-state_, formally defined thus:

> The social class comprising private interests that are enabled,
> supported, protected, or otherwise sustained by the state's acts of
> sovereignty, which controls the entry points, critical infrastructure,
> or other requisite factors of economic conduct, and which, inter alia,
> provides state-like functions in domains or fields of endeavour
> outside the narrow confines of profit-oriented production and
> consumption in exchange for a legally sanctioned oligopolistic
> privilege in the markets it operates in.

## Deplatforming and fundamental rights

Even if we set aside the justifiable critique against the very presence
of such a class, we cannot avoid the immediate problems it creates for
any self-proclaimed rules-based polity.  Platformarchs are private
actors who, for all intents and purposes, have state-like powers without
any of the concomitant checks on how those may be exercised.  Subjects
of taxation can, for instance, appeal to the principle of "no taxation
without representation" which practically means that the citizenry must
maintain the ability to choose its governors and partake in the
decision-making processes that affect it.  Nothing of the sort applies
to omnipotent economic overlords who are neither voted in office, nor
can they be forced out of it when their decisions run contrary to the
general good.

The least that can be done is to push for a revaluation of platforms as
subjects of the law.  They cannot be placed in the same category as any
other item of private property.  Instead, they belong to a special class
of goods that must be regulated in such a way as to guarantee the
unencumbered application of fundamental rights and the overall
functioning of the rules-based polity, including the provisions on "who
governs" and "where is the locus of power".

[ Read: [Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood](https://protesilaos.com/stsns/) ]

Which brings us to the trending tendency of deplatforming, the act of
banning a person, group, or set of ideas from a given platform, in this
case an online network.  The particularities of current affairs should
not distract us from appreciating the forces at play and understanding
the wider implications of sweeping changes that happen with what feels
like the press of a button: the platformarch can unilaterally silence a
target with no due process, without having to justify their decision to
any body or agency, and without any recourse to remedies for those
affected.

In essence, this injustice is possible because the demi-state is not
recognised as such, but rather as a series of private actors.  The
reasoning is that which applies to individuals: a household owner can
decide who to invite at their party, a restaurant can be eclectic about
its clientele, and so on.  The important detail, however, is that such
acts do not ramify into the province of jurisprudence in the sense that
they do not shape the very conditions in which fundamental rights may be
upheld (notwithstanding the possibility of being illegal in other ways).

To insist on treating the demi-state as akin to the private sector
at-large, as some typical family business, is to misrepresent reality
and, by extension, to labour against the viability of the rule of law.
In order to preserve the achievement of a rules-based polity it is
necessary to recognise platformarchs as controllers of key resources and
proceed to apply special provisions that prevent their activities from
either substituting the law on a case-by-case basis or otherwise
rendering it irrelevant.

_Should some malevolent person be denied of their right to free speech?_
That may well be answered in the affirmative, provided that all checks
have been respected and all other options have been exhausted.  Else the
decision is odious.  It is why we have courts of law: to adjudicate over
disputes on who maintains the right to do what in light of the
prevailing circumstances and, consequently, to determine what may be
considered just.  Any limitation on fundamental rights must be deemed
absolutely necessary, narrow in scope, and proportional in application.

[ Read: [Notes on Rules](https://protesilaos.com/notes-on-rules) ]

## The power of deplatforming as a threat to the rule of law

It is easy for short-term party politics and temporary emotions to
prevail over reason, just as it has been proven time and again that a
democracy can descend into ochlocracy (mob rule) or some other form of
tyranny whenever the values underpinning the polity are suspended.

The expedient lie that perhaps well-meaning persons will believe in is
that the end of deplatforming some controversial and much-maligned
person or group thereof justifies the means of letting platformarchs
operate in legality's stead.  Such considerations cannot form a reliable
basis for the longer-term well-being of the political whole, as there is
nothing whatsoever that constrains the arbitrary and inherently
disproportionate medium of deplatforming from applying to any target
given the right circumstances.

Furthermore, there is no credible guarantee against covert forms of
deplatforming in online networks, realised as variants of so-called
"filter bubbles", where algorithms purposefully demote or outright
conceal certain items from ever entering the public mind while
reinforcing biases in parallel.  Coupled with the phenomenon of fake
news and the money-making and oligopolistic incentives of platformarchs,
such opaque instruments cannot be trusted to promote the general
interest nor should they, given the complete absence of
institutionalised checks on their ongoing operation.

Activism against "the wrong people", which supports large-scale
censorship and other draconian measures in the name of democracy is
misguided.  It essentially misunderstands the wise compromise that
underlies the spirit of fundamental rights, namely, that when all
factors are considered it is safer to grant freedoms indiscriminately at
the outset than to offer liberty only to those who are deemed worthy of
it ex post facto by some unaccountable hierarchy.

What ultimately is at stake here is whether a body politic will remain
faithful to a rules-based system, with the proviso that it recalibrates
it to account for the presence of the demi-state.  Otherwise society
will be forced down the treacherous path of trusting the demi-state to
whimsically interpret the public good; a demi-state that is free from
any constraints on the exercise of its newfound authority.

Today some online network is gagging your political opponents and you
approve of it because you deplore those people.  Tomorrow the banking
system of a cashless economy will be able to render anyone monetarily
homeless just by denying them services.  Extend that to health insurance
and pharmaceuticals and all other industries where platformarchs exist.
And then try to answer with sincerity, _who governs_ and _wheres is the
locus of power_.

Allowing an economic elite to act as the arbiter of all legality and the
judge of all morality is a recipe for disaster.  It is the telltale sign
of a polity that is on the cusp of tyranny.
