---
title: "The structural aspects of public health"
excerpt: "It is not just the pandemic we should think of when talking about public health. There are systemic issues involved."
---

Public health has now become synonymous with how we cope with the
pandemic.  Though it is understandable that the focus is on containing
the spread of the corona virus, it is important to remind ourselves of
the underlying reality that renders COVID possible and potentially
dangerous.  The pandemic has exposed the systemic flaws of modern
society, which can be summarised as (i) urbanisation, (ii) inconsiderate
eating practices, (iii) lack of exercise in the form of longer-term,
daily habits coupled with an ethos of physical wellness (iv) excessive
confinement to closed spaces such as offices with heating or air
conditioning.

+ Urbanisation has increased the density of human populations, while
  simultaneously downgrading the quality of their everyday environment.
  Cities are centres of pollution, meaning that one does not breath
  benign air.  Cities combined with international trade make people
  oblivious to the realities of seasonal agricultural production, to the
  effect that they have no natural check on what they eat and when: for
  example, grapes grow towards the end of the summer and so a natural
  life cycle will prevent you from overdoing it by consuming them all
  year round.  Furthermore, cities in a capitalist world that is
  single-minded about incessant growth impose rhythms that are
  detrimental to one's overall stability, by sustaining pressure and
  engendering or amplifying anxiety.

+ Food is a complete disaster and the single most important cause in a
  vast number of chronic diseases.  Just walk into a grocery store and
  take note of everything that is outright unhealthy: all processed
  foods, everything that contains preservatives or artificial flavours
  and colours, sweets, soft drinks, alcoholic beverages, chips,
  industrial loaf which is made with numerous dubious ingredients that
  contribute to its taste and texture...  The list goes on.  Then we
  have practices which lead to a degradation in the quality of otherwise
  genuine food, such as adding sugar in the preparation of meals,
  overcooking vegetables, using sauces which ultimately contain
  sugar/salt and questionable additives, frying the ingredients,
  overdoing it with substances that should only be taken in small doses
  such as by eating lots of fruits, and so on.  One's diet is essential
  to how they feel and how healthy they are inclined to be overall.

+ Lack of exercise is a more tricky case because you will find people
  who go the gym to work out.  The key here is to think of training as a
  quotidian condition that happens continuously, not just one hour per
  some fixed schedule.  Some gym-goers may be doing it properly, though
  a lot of people will indulge in bad habits, such as eating junk food
  and then going to the gym to entertain the illusion that they are
  burning off what they have just consumed.  Exercise is about one's
  longer-term condition.  It is at its best when it contributes to
  stability, instead of the erratic heights and lows that the
  gym-going-junk-food-consumer endures.

+ Confinement to closed spaces results in poor air quality.  Such spaces
  further compound the inherent problem cities have with what people
  breath.  Whether it is office work, the gym, or a car with closed
  windows and air conditioning turned on, the recycling of one's breath
  is always harmful, let alone the potential damage coming from the
  sudden changes in temperature when moving between indoors and
  outdoors.
  
Those are intertwined though we treat them separately to make sense of
phenomena.  They are all part of a wider system that encompasses
production, consumption, and ownership:

1. Production involves all techniques and methods that go into making
   the good.  In the case of food, production is typically inimical to
   the presence and sustainability of ecosystems.  It abuses animals to
   get their by-products such as milk or eggs, and it mistreats those
   which are intended to be slaughtered.  It also endangers or
   exterminates bees, rodents, snakes, birds of all kinds, etc.
   Agricultural practices involve monoculture and the use of chemicals
   which ultimately contribute to the deterioration of the soil's
   quality, which then reinforces the need for yet more chemicals to
   undo the damage of the previous ones, so the vicious cycle
   invigorates itself.

2. Consumption covers everything from packaging, distribution,
   advertising, handling of waste.  Most products on a supermarket's
   shelf are wrapped in plastic.  It is supposedly cheap to produce
   because its accounting does not factor in the damages to the planet.
   Advertising typically is downright unethical, for it is an exercise
   in misleading potential customers.  Think, for instance, of a certain
   soft drink that purports to contain "zero sugar" yet remains as
   invidious as ever for everything else it has and does.  Or consider
   how a major junk food ~~defiler~~ provider is incentivising kids to
   buy its garbage by packaging it with a toy.  Or even take the
   seemingly innocuous claims about certain "superfoods", which can
   easily lead one to believe that they can counter-balance their poor
   habits simply by eating those, while keeping everything else
   constant.
   
3. Ownership pertains to the system of values that underpins this order.
   At its core is the distribution of control in a hierarchical
   structure that favours those at the higher strata.  Layered on top of
   that is the sanctification of property rights for those in power,
   though not for property in general as that remains an easy pray for
   the state.  The maximisation of profit follows therefrom as the
   meta-narrative that rationalises gathering increasingly more wealth
   and control at the top.  Such is the conventional wisdom that
   profitability alone is considered a virtue in itself, expressed in
   the shared deceit on the desirability of year-on-year fiscal growth.
   The concentration of wealth in fewer hands is what enables so-called
   "economies of scale" and "horizontally integrated" management, which
   in turn feed into production and consumption patterns.
   
Couched in those terms, we have a political system and concomitant
business incentives that have a direct effect on all aspects of personal
well-being and on public health at-large.  The establishment prioritises
profits without considering the actual costs on people and the planet in
general.

## Duty towards others

Decision-makers are employing all means possible to focus minds on the
ongoing vaccination programmes to limit the spread of COVID.  One
rhetorical device they use is that of putting the brunt of the blame on
those who have not taken the jab and who, perhaps, have no intention of
doing so.  Vaccination is described as a moral imperative to safeguard
the health of others, which rests on the kernel of truth that some
vulnerable groups are in need of protection.

What is not being discussed is the underlying reality of people's
overall condition and the structural magnitudes contributing to it.  The
authorities have had no trouble imposing restrictive measures of all
sorts.  Those have, among others, resulted in mass impoverishment and
bankruptcies, as well as the further erosion of labour rights for the
lower parts of the income distribution, yet are combined with record
profits for major corporate actors.  All this is forgiven as the
necessary cost of tackling the pandemic, or so the apologists claim.
Yet the authorities, who are apparently committed to the valiant
promotion of public health, have done nothing whatsoever to contain the
distribution and availability of all the rubbish that masquerades as
food nowadays.

Those who work all day and have no energy left to go for a proper walk,
those who are forced into tight schedules and eat junk as a necessity in
order to stay on time, those who are misled by advertisers into making
choices that are detrimental to them, overweight and obese people, as
well as those with relevant chronic diseases like type 2 diabetes, are
all victims of an immoral system of the joint magnitudes of
production-consumption-ownership; a system that has a vested interest in
poor personal health and in squeezing the life out of every person,
every animal, every natural resource it controls.

While a vaccine can help protect against a given virus, it does not
address the underlying systemic causes, nor does it bring about a
paradigm shift in how we think of food, the unity between the mental and
physical states, and public health in their wider context as inherently
_political phenomena_.

The rhetoric of social responsibility is insincere, for it does not
consider its own implications and puts the blame wholly on private
persons for faults that are not entirely their own.  If you claim that
all people have a duty towards others, then that means they possess the
agency to fully carry on such a task in pursuit of the betterment of
their own condition.  And if that is so, then you must be prepared to
deal with the consequences, such as those who are healthy openly
opposing, say, overweight and obese persons on the premise that the
latter group---those who also have the aforementioned moral agency---do
not assume responsibility for their own health and so nor should the
former.  The argument applies equally to cases where such a fully
capable agent realises that they do not need the government in order to
realise their potential for taking care of their health and, a fortiori,
are not obliged to follow the exhortations of some bureaucrat, public
intellectual, or whatnot.  In other words, the social responsibility
bandwagon is a distraction from the persistent, system-wide problems.
It risks turning groups of people against each other, while those at the
top continue unencumbered with business as usual.

If you want to insist on the morality theme, there exists personal duty
of a different sort: that of recognising the truth of the case and
helping move things towards a different direction altogether that is
respectful of humanity as a whole and all other life forms in a spirit
of sustainability.

We all have the means to resist being mistreated by a status quo that
has made fiscal growth its sole guiding principle.  To take care of
yourself is to make a minor revolution.  Every little bit counts.  It
all starts from small beginnings, though commitment to it will have a
cumulative effect.  Be prepared to enact change.  Stop eating sweets.
Zero!  No more soft drinks.  Dispose of all junk food.  Walk and be
active.  Strive for a balanced lifestyle that is consistent with natural
cycles.  You get the idea.  Resist advertisers who want you to spend all
your disposable income on stuff you do not need.  Hold on to your
possessions for as long as they last.  In short, say "no" to those who
profiteer from your bad habits and seek out knowledge on how to improve
the quality of what you buy.  Establish networks to promote your goals
and support each other.

Once you assume responsibility and adopt a purposeful stance towards
life, you will soon realise how everything is connected and that you
cannot decouple health from politics, politics for economics, economics
from social organisation.  You will also understand on your own what
else needs to be done to break the mould you currently find yourself in.
Let the prevailing conditions serve as a reminder that we were in
trouble long before the pandemic broke out and that the real solution,
the one which guarantees that we have learnt from past mistakes and are
thus prepared to act decisively, requires thoroughgoing reforms across
the board.
