---
title: "A leftist perspective on the war in Ukraine"
subtitle: "Against all forms of imperialism"
excerpt: "Opinion against all forms of imperialism and its injustices."
---

At times of crisis narratives about multifaceted states of affairs
devolve into stories of monolith-like formations pitted against each
other.  What constitutes a complex reality is impressed in the public
mind as a generic binary of good versus evil.  Nuance is lost, as
permutations in between the extremes are either not tolerated or not
perceived as tenable.

Such is the case with the war in Ukraine, where we are compelled to pick
sides in an ostensible conflict of the forces of justice against the
rapacious hordes of tyranny.  Any other point of view, any proposition
that stresses the fact that the world of politics is messy, with shades
of grey defining the proverbial picture, is derided as an ally of the
designated enemy and risks being persecuted as such.

We are expected to (i) agree with the inane notion that this is a case
of black-and-white and (ii) are pressured to provide unconditional
support to the powers that be on the premise of them supposedly being on
the side of righteousness.  Such simplistic conception of evolving
circumstances can only engender invidious results.  Every dark age
starts with the belief that there may only ever be one answer to life
which, in this case, is supposed to be a pro-NATO, pro-EU, and
anti-Russia position.

The fact, however, is that reality is complex.  This war does not occur
in a political, economic, historical, cultural vacuum.  There are
factors at play which prompt us to consider the intersection between
seemingly unrelated magnitudes.  The gist is that we are dealing with
yet another phase in the conflict between opposing imperialisms.  The
expansionary policies of NATO and the European Union collide with the
tsarism of the Putin regime.  Ukraine is caught in the middle and people
suffer as a result.

There are multiple aspects to this basic condition that we cannot afford
to disregard.  The war is a disaster for humans and the environment
at-large.  That much is clear.  What is lost amid the noise is the
insight that those who are pulling the strings in Russia and the West
are not the respective side's good guys.

On geopolitical affairs, NATO powers have a track record of regime
change and of leaving power vacuums in their wake.  What is touted as a
defensive organisation has waged wars of aggression under various
pretexts on more than one occasion.  Meanwhile, the EU has blithely
operated as the de facto political arm of the Atlantic alliance due to
the overlap between its eastward enlargement and that of NATO,
culminating in the political tensions in Ukraine over the past decade
which foreshadowed this war.  Couched in those terms, the EU has not
adequately distanced itself from the USA establishment's trigger-happy
foreign policy and thus cannot pretend to be morally neutral, let alone
righteous.

In terms of politico-economic organisation, both Russia and Western
states are capitalist, despite secondary points of differentiation, that
exhibit the same overall structure of a two-tier order in which a tiny
minority of what I call "platformarchs" is in control of the entry
points to any given industry.  Western media does a decent job at
describing Russian plutocrats for what they truly are: "oligarchs",
i.e. part of an oligarchy.  Alas, it fails miserably in its description
of the equivalent phenomenon when it comes to Western regimes.  "Our"
plutocrats are instead lauded as ingenious and tireless entrepreneurs.
They typically have an aura of mystique surrounding their persona or are
the centrepiece of some cult of personality.  There is no mainstream
critique of the unscrupulous methods employed in pursuit of their
extractive business practices, no reform agenda to outright dismantle
the nexus of legal arrangements that enable large-scale tax avoidance
and tax base erosion, nor are platformarchs described for what they
actually are: part of an oligarchy that hides in plain sight, which
encompasses political and economic elites.  Both in the West and in
Russia (and elsewhere) we witness the symbiosis of plutocrats with the
state apparatus, resulting in a third category I describe as the
"demi-state": an amalgam of corporatist and Ã©tatist interests.

[ Read: [Crises, transnationalism, and the
demi-state](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2020-05-01-internationalism-localism/)
(2020-05-01) ]

[ Read: [On platformarchs, the demi-state, and
deplatforming](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2021-01-26-platformarchs-demistate-deplatforming/)
(2021-01-26) ]

[ Read: [On the nation-state, democracy, and
transnationalism](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2021-05-29-nation-state-democracy-transnationalism/)
(2021-05-29) ]

The prevailing economic order extends to the ownership of traditional
mass media and so-called "social" media.  What appears as pluralism is
but a facade, as the ownership of most, if not all, outlets is
consolidated in vast portfolios that are held by a tiny minority.
Platformarchs do not simply mind their affairs and allow some
romanticised, perfectly objective journalism to do its job without any
kind of interference.  No!  Platformarchs own the very media of
communication and dictate what will find currency "on air".  Yet another
indication of the prevailing oligarchy which masquerades as "democracy",
of monologue that is peddled as "public dialogue", of indoctrination
that is valorised as "the popular will".

As for the EU in particular, the overall complexity of the Economic and
Monetary Union obscures its illiberal disposition when it comes to
matters of fiscal and monetary policy.  The euro is part of an
architecture that practically limits the right of peoples to
self-determination, both individually in their expression as
member-states of the EU, and collectively as an ad-hoc, emergent
European demos.  The EMU practically enforces persistent impoverishment
under the guise of quasi-permanent rules on debts, deficits, banking
regulation, and so on, that are wrapped in jargon such as "economic
governance", "European Semester", "monetary dialogue", "micro- and
macro- prudential policy", et cetera.  The European Central Bank is an
unaccountable institution that has been actively engaging in policies
that redistribute wealth upward.  Inequality is on the rise while
inflation has been on an irresistible upward trend prior to the obvious
supply-side shocks caused by the war in Ukraine.  All while a fully
fledged pro-megacorporation disposition has been at full force in the
form of what is euphemistically known as "quantitative easing", which is
essentially free money for those close to the source of the stimulus.

[ Read: [On the appropriation of
Europe](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2020-09-28-appropriation-europe/)
(2020-09-28) ]

[ Read: [On the political telos of the
euro](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2022-01-22-euro-political-end/)
(2022-01-22) ]

Against this backdrop, it is irresponsible to ignore the egregious
injustices that take place at home and abroad.  We cannot afford to
offer support to the view that Western elites are "the good guys" in an
otherwise terrible tragedy.  They are just as abhorrent as the oligarchs
who oppress and exploit the Russian peoples and who now have their eyes
set on Ukraine.

Time and again the establishment has resorted to fear-mongering, which
is reducible to the common tactic of inducing a sense that "there is no
alternative" (the infamous "TINA").  In the face of the fabricated
narrative that the EU-NATO tandem represents the only viable option, we
must counter with a principled and necessarily nuanced set of arguments
for reform at home.  Imperialism is deplorable in all of its forms.
Whether it manifests as jingoism, corporate-driven post-colonialism, or
recrudescent feudalism.  The principled position is to oppose both Putin
and co. and their Western counterparts.  We should insist on the
thoroughgoing reform of the European Union to make it truly abide by the
principle of subsidiarity (distribution of authority close to the
citizens) and to tear down the euro edifice which greatly favours the
interests of a core business lobby at the detriment of all the rest.
Internally, we must campaign for pro-social policies and seize every
opportunity at undermining the power of incumbent forces.  To that end,
we ought to resist the urge to channel scarce resources to the coffers
of industrialists and their banker friends in view of engineering some
misguided large-scale re-militarisation.

The answer to war is not more war.  We must sabotage all such
stratagems, each of us with whatever means available.  Do not give the
oligarchs on either side of this conflict fodder for their cannons.
