---
title: 'Comment on “Why 1% Of The World’s Population Controls 45% Of The Wealth”'
excerpt: "My comment on a video by Jordan Peterson on why inequality exists."
---

I watched a video published by Jordan Peterson with the title [Why 1% Of
The World's Population Controls 45% Of The
Wealth](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VcHMKAklPPM).  What follows are
my initial thoughts on the matter.

* * *

The ~15 minute video talks about what could be considered relevant
factors of biological differentiation and social behavioural patterns
that produce uneven outcomes over a given period of time.  There are
mentions of elite athletes and how they outdo their peers.  Then there
is a reference to the personality trait that is associated with
creativity and how, basically, successful entrepreneurs share that
trait.  What the video does not bring attention to is the set of
legal-institutional arrangements that turn a cyclical natural phenomenon
in to a structural political reality.

First off, why "cyclical"?  Consider the case of an elite athlete.  They
will outperform other athletes for a few years.  In that time span they
will earn more income, other things being equal.  But they cannot
continue earning more income from their sheer talent and athletic
ability over the long-term.  Their performance will eventually
deteriorate until it no longer is at that elite level.  Consequently,
their income will diminish until it matches their present output and
eventually fade away (again, _ceteris paribus_).

What can turn the cyclical in to a structural phenomenon?  Let's
continue with our example.  For an athlete of this sort to perpetually
profit, they must benefit from a favourable legal order that allows them
to extract rent.  This can be in the form of image rights, for instance.
The very notion of owning your image is codified in law and has no
meaning and binding effect outside of it.  These image rights, this
intangible property that the lawmaker has enacted into being, can be
transferred, traded, inherited, and generally be treated as an asset.
In other words, it no longer is about the athletic performance per se
but the marketing---the narrative---surrounding it.

Sport in general is not a good analogy of what happens in the world and
why half the wealth is in the hands of a tiny minority (and of that
half, how much is at the very top, i.e. the 1% of the 1%?).  Outside the
confines of sport, we have to account for a non-exhaustive list of
factors that includes (i) intellectual property at a much greater scale
as it permeates and penetrates every aspect of economic activity, (ii)
de facto oligopolistic markets or even shadow monopolies
underpinned---and enabled---by legal barriers to entry, (iii) a global
order of tax havens or otherwise favourable jurisdictions for the
uber-rich to siphon their profits to in order to avoid taxation and
erode their tax base (taxable material/wealth), (iv) so-called
"incentives" and tax breaks provided by the state which typically favour
a small minority of beneficiaries, (v) the favourable institutionalised
position of certain corporations, such as mega-banks which are close to
the source of practically free new money in the form of the central
bank's quantitative easing policies, (vi) the flip-side of oligopolistic
or monopolistic status or institutionalised significance which manifests
as implicit or explicit guarantees provided by the state to a handful of
corporations which are deemed "too big to fail" for a variety of
reasons.

When, say, a mega-bank benefits from the central bank's QE and when it
is blithely bailed out by the state with taxpayer money while people
live under grinding austerity, it is not because some genius
entrepreneur with peerless business acumen and a unique creative talent
is working tirelessly to add value to society.  The parallel with the
elite athlete is misleading, because it obfuscates the systemic nature
of the phenomenon where an individual or relatively small group thereof
benefits from a system that is designed for them and, once we factor in
lobbying, sponsorships, media ownership, and manipulation of
politicians, scientists, journalists, _by them_.

This brings us back to the distinction between cyclical and structural
magnitudes.  Yes, it is possible for an especially talented person to
win all the awards, enjoy all the accolades, earn more money, and gain
whatever else their sheer ability renders feasible.  What is not
realistic is for that to happen in perpetuity and to always benefit the
same class of people.  In our world, we cannot afford to treat such
issues by reducing them to biology.  There is a political reality in
place which adds a systemic dimension to the matter at hand.  If we
insist on ignoring the system, we limit ourselves to the examination of
a case whose constitution in our mind does not correspond with its
actuality.

The structural nature of inequality has implications on the notion of
"equality of opportunity".  We are made to believe that we are all made
equal and all have the same chances in life.  This would be true if, for
example, the central bank's QE would be distributed evenly among us, the
state would bail us all out indiscriminately or not bail out any
business whatsoever, tax havens would not exist and everyone paid the
same taxes and was at all times subject to the same laws, and so on.  If
we had what the ancient Greeks called _isonomia_ (isonomy), meaning
equality of law or institution, then we would indeed enjoy equal
opportunities.  Our world does not have isonomy.  Some are benefiting
from the established order _a priori_, regardless of biological traits,
while others endure a life of agonising precarity and are then
brainwashed to think of themselves as simply more stupid and lazy.
Instead of isonomy, we as peoples are defined by our _heteronomy_ (the
opposite of _autonomy_; rule by another): those who benefit from the
system which they themselves manipulate, rule in our name over a
political order that is democratic in name only.

This is not to say that we should disregard biology and psychology.  To
understand phenomena at a deeper level we need interdisciplinary
methods.  My concern here focuses on what the emphasis is, for it feels
like some are taking certain things for granted, are searching for data
points that vindicate the categories they already assume as constant,
and are thus inadvertently peddling deep-seated ideological prejudices
as impartial, morally neutral insights.

Finally, we have not even mentioned the international aspect of
inequality and its colonialist or imperialist expression.  Not only do
we have egregious inequality within countries, but also between
countries as the richest economies---or, rather, a handful of corporate
actors---continuously drain the poorer ones of their natural resources
as well as their human potential ("brain-drain", as it is called).  At
any rate, I think my point is clear: the problem is systemic and cannot
be explained solely by the distribution of talents among the population.
