---
title: "On the political telos of the euro"
excerpt: "Opinion on the longer-term political role of the euro to catalyse the creation of a European state."
---

Writing for _Project Syndicate_, Yanis Varoufakis discusses how the euro
did not catalyse the integration of its Member States as was its
original promise.  Instead, the EU's single currency exacerbated the
economic crises post 2008 and [divided
Europe](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/euro-has-promoted-members-divergence-not-convergence-by-yanis-varoufakis-2022-01).

> [About institutional reforms to prop up the euro] These are
> undoubtedly large changes. But they constitute the minimum that was
> needed to keep the euro afloat without changing its character. By
> implementing them, the EU confirmed its readiness to change everything
> in order to keep everything the same â€“ or, more precisely, to avoid
> the one change that matters: the creation of a proper fiscal and
> political union, which is the prerequisite for managing macroeconomic
> shocks and eliminating regional imbalances.

What we need to consider here is how the European integration process
works.  There has never been a case of thoroughgoing reforms that
refashioned the EU (and its predecessors).  Change happens gradually
with each crisis being treated as an opportunity to address some of the
apparent shortcomings in the institutional setup of the project.

Consider, for instance, the most obvious flaw in the design of the euro:
the lack of a counter-party treasury to the European Central Bank.  The
euro was conceived as a stateless currency that had no system-wide
fiscal mechanisms to complement the nascent monetary union.  The only
Europe-wide provisions on fiscal affairs were limited to essentially
arbitrary targets for the budget deficit and public debt (I say
"arbitrary" because they are not hard science).  Those have eventually
developed into the European Semester that underpins the economic
governance of the Union.  This "economic governance" is a concerted
effort to approximate the fiscal positions of all Member States, though
it still lacks the tools and concomitant legitimacy to, say,
redistribute wealth between regions.

While we can think of this state of affairs as a major problem, there is
a sense in which it is a feature of the overall conduct of European
affairs: that of letting things reach a tipping point before introducing
controversial reforms under the pretence that they are absolutely
necessary technical measures to prevent impending doom.  The European
Semester and all its underlying regulations are a product of this
method, as they were introduced at the height of the post 2008 financial
calamity.  Same for the infamous Troika regimes that enforced austerity
in hard-hit countries.

The euro occupies an unsustainable spot between the statelessness of its
original conception in the Treaty of Maastricht and the eventuality of a
fully fledged EU-wide statism.  Which is why even folks who are
constructively critical or sceptical of the EU's merits call for the
creation of the necessary legal-institutional arrangements at the
supranational level to ensure the viability of the euro, namely, the
creation of an EU fiscal capacity that can have its own debt and issue
the corresponding financial instruments (let's call them "eurobonds"),
eventually culminating in a European government.

There are no accidents here.  No careless omissions and mysterious
structural shortcomings.  Fundamentally, the euro has always been a
long-term project to concentrate sovereignty at the supranational
political centre and to do so as a matter of technical necessity, not
bottom-up initiative.  The euro epitomises the elitism that has always
kept the European integration process away from citizens.  People were
fed lies about how the single currency would bring paradise on earth,
which helped the apparatchiks circumvent the messy politics of having to
gain popular support for a European superstate.

It is not trivial to unite Europeans and have them support a single
[federal] government.  Their cultural diversity renders the task
virtually impossible, especially if it is supposed to be implemented
outright.  EU policy-makers are well aware of the difficulties with such
an endeavour and thus adopt their incrementalist, top-bottom method to
integration.  Side effects of this process are (i) the predominantly
technocratic and intergovernmental nature of EU affairs, (ii) the
overall indifference of citizens to what is happening in "Brussels",
where Brussels represents the political centre of the Union and not
necessarily the Belgian capital.

Against this backdrop, the normative questions surrounding the very
existence of the euro are set aside or relegated to matters of secondary
importance.  The debate revolves around how to iterate on what
_Maastricht_ set in motion with regard to monetary union.  In other
words, we are not presented with real options, with genuine
alternatives.  There is the awkwardness of the status quo and the
prospect of ever-closer Union, which means more power for the
supranational level.

As we have seen with the European Semester or with the establishment of
the European Stability Mechanism, "more Europe" does not simply rectify
errors in the institutional architecture of the EU.  It rather
reinforces the established economic-political order, granting it the
means to impose its ideocentric will while masquerading it as political
pragmatism.  Instead of talking about a class-conscious set of measures
that favours business cronies, we are regaled with seemingly neutral
terms like "economic governance".  Instead of the impoverishment and
marginalisation of the lower parts of the income distribution, the lack
of state intervention for those in need combined with the presence of
interventionism when it comes to supporting corporate interests, we deal
with "fiscal targets" as part of some "semester" of ordinary
bureaucratic dialogue.

The euro then symbolises---and accelerates---the further
depoliticisation of the narrative of European integration.  A Eurostate
is discussed in terms of filling in the gaps of the existing design,
though not on its own merits of whether it would do us good to actually
have such a polity.  This aspect is totally absent from the debate or,
if it is recognised, it is dismissed in advance as populism, europhobia,
and the like.

Then we have other normative considerations that are cast to the
margins, pertaining to the presence of a European fiscal capacity.  Has
there ever been a sovereign that did not ultimately develop its own
security forces and army or failed trying?  Not only do we have to
consider how new fiscal powers are to be [mis-]used, we must also look
at the prospect of perpetually addressing the ostensible design flaws of
the status quo because it will always be lacking some important feature
of a state until it becomes one.

Put differently, the idea that we must create a fiscal union to make the
euro viable comes with the latent risk of then having to expand the
fiscal union with a police union, a military union, and so on.  There is
nothing in the nature of things that will halt that momentum and instead
give us free eurobonds without any of the downsides of an omnipotent
supranational authority.

It still is not clear that the euro needs to be saved.  Perhaps it is
better to organise its orderly disintegration and keep the future EU
limited to what it once was: a free trade area comprised of otherwise
independent states.  At least that will save us from the interdependence
we currently find ourselves in where we are powerless to deal with one
asymmetric shock after another or are forced to cope with it in an
inefficient way.

Consider then the political telos of the euro, its role in the bigger
picture of European affairs, and stop worrying about some lacunae in its
institutional makeup.
