---
title: "On culture and the ‘more Europe’ cliché"
excerpt: "Opinion piece on the need to avoid the simplistic thinking that 'more Europe' helps Europeans improve their lives."
---

Writing for _Social Europe_, professor Gijs de Vries argues that [Europe
must reimagine its cultural
policies](https://socialeurope.eu/europe-must-reimagine-its-cultural-policies)
in order to cope with the challenges of our era:

> We live in a time of growing intolerance and increasing
> nationalism. Europe’s social fabric is fraying at the edges. To
> restore a sense of unity, of trust and direction, and to reconnect
> minorities and majorities we need to imagine and deliver a common
> European future. Only if we harness the power of culture can we do so.

Notwithstanding the professor's lofty language, I feel that culture
cannot be reduced to a finite quantity that must be managed between the
national and European levels.  The EU has the propensity to think of
every case as a matter of distributing competences, because that is how
it historically accumulates power at its political centre.  The formula
is simple: a problem is identified where the only viable solution is the
generic and all-too-predictable appeal to "more Europe", for the
realisation of "ever-closer Union" in the form of increased competences
at the supranational level.

Culture is an area of policy that is hitherto underdeveloped at the
European level due to how the Treaties classify it as a matter where the
Union has residual functions or else a so-called "supportive competence"
(Article 6 TFEU).  However, the letter of the law does provide the basis
for greater EU involvement, as _"The Union shall have competence to
carry out actions to support, coordinate or supplement the actions of
the Member States"_.  The issue then is not a matter of ability, but of
political calculus: how would the EU benefit from such an initiative and
what are the compelling reasons to launch one at present time.

What we learn from the European integration process is that
decision-makers adopt a gradualist approach to EU affairs: they wait for
things to reach a dead-end, for a crisis to be made manifest, before
they interfere with arguments on the necessary involvement of the Union.

As such, integration has always been framed in economistic (not
_economic_) terms of economies of scale.  The rationale is of pooling
resources, sharing know-how, and harmonising positions across Member
States.  While plausible, this approach inevitably devolves into an
exercise in accounting, where the EU is shown to be the more profitable
or business-savvy option regardless of moral considerations.

Unlike the corporate world which is dominated by the hierarchical model
of organisation where few are expected and encouraged to make decisions
on behalf of many, politics in Europe are in principle underpinned by
normative qualities of broad-based participation.  There is an
expectation to not only conform with democratic etiquette, but to
actually make citizens feel like they own the policies which affect
their quotidian life.

The EU fails to deliver on this front despite its vaunted "European
values" including the surface-level commitment to the connatural
principles of subsidiarity, proportionality, and conferral.  The reason
is the very makeup of its institutional order which forces national
governments to engage in intergovernmental bargaining where the balance
of power between them defines both the parameters and the substantive
features of the given agenda item.

The Union acts in a technocratic fashion with the logic of a business
executive because that is all it can do and has ever done.  It is a
cliché to invoke the bugaboo of nationalism or populism, depending on
the specifics, as if it is nationalists/populists who are in charge and
are driving the EU forward.  Where are these mighty foes in Europe's
centres of power?  The European Commission?  The European Council or
Council of the EU?  The Eurogroup?  The European Central Bank?  The
Paris-Berlin tandem?  The ineffectual European Parliament?  Just where
are they hiding?

The inference then is that the source of trouble is not the elite of the
Union but its popular base.  Which in turn implies that the appeal to
instrumentalise yet another area of policy in pursuit of "ever-closer
Union" is a thinly disguised attempt by the apparatchiks of the Brussels
establishment and their intellectual vanguard to further reinforce their
position.

It is frivolous to blame Europe's woes on political forces that are not
determining EU politics.  This has been the lazy argument of a
complacent broader Left that is slowly but surely forgetting about
politics as a distribution of power and control among different classes
of people; a Left that is adopting its own brand of banal nationalism,
understood as supranationalism.  In a misguided attempt to fend off
exaggerated threats, it is becoming the apologist of a status quo whose
policies have devastated working peoples and have ravaged small
businesses in an uneven playing field that favours large multinationals
and those who have the resources as well as lack of scruples to engage
in cross-border tax avoidance or unethical fiscal engineering.

Meanwhile, disposable incomes are being eroded by galloping inflation
(including core inflation).  The European Central Bank has been happily
pumping oodles of liquidity in the system through a policy that favours
those who are closer to the origin of the new money; a policy that
contributes to greater inequality and higher concentration of wealth in
fewer hands.  What is the ECB expecting when it is engendering or
reinforcing inflationary pressures on a monumental scale?  Liquidity
does not simply evaporate.  After it creates bubbles in markets that are
not tracked by the nominal inflation target (e.g. fine art), it
inevitably finds its way to the real economy.  We thus suffer the
chilling effects of a programme with far-reaching fiscal ramifications
that did not spring from a position of widespread popular consensus but
was instead devised in the upper echelons of a technocratic power
structure.

To the point of leveraging "culture", we are again presented with the
potential praxis of consolidating resources at the supranational level.
We are thus blithely ignoring the possibility that what Europe needs to
realise its democratic aspirations is devolution of competences or else
a redistribution of authority away from its political centre.  What good
are the much-touted "European values" if they do not inform a daily
reality and if they are only used as a pretext to peddle the narrative
of the EU apparatus' built-in benevolence or enlightenment?

Culture, or rather a simulacrum that can fit into the stratagems of
political expedience, is being weaponised in an effort to appropriate it
from its particular milieu.  There is no singular European culture, nor
is it desirable to homogenise the cultures of this continent in pursuit
of dubious short-term ends.  Homogenisation of this sort entails the
cultivation of a tenuous meta-narrative of Europeanness, accompanied by
the commensurate concentration of competences, which the EU can then
assiduously exploit to forward its ambitions.

What makes the broader Left think that granting the Union more means to
combat the nationalists/populists will be a net positive for its own
priorities?  The enemy of my enemy is not always a friend.  Only those
who did not learn the lessons of history think otherwise.  An omnipotent
EU is one that can, for example, enforce grinding austerity with greater
ease; an EU whose business-centric modus operandi will make it turn
culture into yet another market infested with Europe-wide corporate
parasites in the fields of cinema, music, and the like.

The Union's problems are complex and multifaceted.  There is a systemic
aspect to them in that the very design of the EU creates and amplifies
inequalities between and within countries.  For as long as we are
misdiagnosing the root cause of Europe's malignancies, we will remain
stuck in false dilemmas where we are called to choose between the
Eurocratic power fantasy of "more Europe" or some equally unappealing
throwback to an imaginary golden age of yesteryear that fills us with
"pride and dignity".

Culture can inspire us to see things from a different perspective: to
appreciate diversity _in vivo_, in its proper context as an expression
of locality, not a mere token of tolerance that lives and dies in some
legal document.  What the broader Left needs is to disinvest from
defending the EU as a necessary good.  Those kind of idealisations do
not benefit anyone but the powers that be.  There is a pressing need to
recognise that sometimes Europe is part of the problem and that "more
Europe" can be detrimental to our everyday social-economic affairs and,
indeed, our cultural outlook.
