---
title: "A new EU debate culture requires systemic changes"
excerpt: "European politics will not be any better if they are led by another coalition of states. Institutional reforms at the EU level are needed."
---

Writing for _Project Syndicate_, Professor Harold James wonders [Who
Will Create a New European Culture of Debate?](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/eu-reform-strategic-reorientation-hampered-by-france-germany-by-harold-james-2024-08):

> Although Europe desperately needs a new strategic outlook, it
> remains obsessed with a politics of consensus, and thus is stuck
> with a stultifying orthodoxy propagated by official circles in
> Berlin and Paris. That means its future may depend on Britain,
> Italy, and Poland creating a new political center of gravity.

The thurst of the professor's argument is that the Franco-German
tandem that has been driving the European integration process hitherto
is ill suited to meet the challenges of our times. The United Kingdom,
Italy, and Poland are instead presented as likely partners that can
provide leadership for the continent.

In the article much talk is about democracy, yet the professor does
not pause to question how exactly would some new coalition of states
be representative of the wider interests of Europeans. It is not that
the Franco-Germans are no longer good enough for "our" purposes: they
were never suitable for a Europe-wide democracy to begin with.

The central problem of the European Union is its intergovernmentalist
design. There is no Union-wide administration with fully fledged
fiscal and military competences, for example. The governance of the EU
is driven by the European Council, which brings together the heads of
state or government of the member states. The member states remain
sovereign in their own right, making the EU a dubious federation at
best with glaring gaps in its democratic legitimation.

It is not that France and Germany do not have a European outlook in
their policies, but rather that the role of their respective
governments is to first promote their national interests and only then
tend to the needs of the EU as a whole. This is what has always been
the case and why no crisis can ever be addressed in the optimal way
from the interest of the Union as such.

Shifting from one group of national governments to another will only
refashion the points of contention while preserving the underlying
constraints of intergovernmentalism. Because there will be no European
government, we will continue to rely on inter-state bargaining for all
key issues. As such, we can expect acrimonious negotiations unfolding
behind closed doors whenever the stakes are high, like what is
happening ever so often at the European Council.

European leaders failed to seize the chances presented by previous
crises, such as during the 2008+ financial meltdown, to introduce new
institutions that would eventually legitimise the EU as a federal
republic. We could have had a European treasury, for example, to
provide a counterpart to the European Central Bank. This would, in
turn, engender the need for a ministry of financial affairs and, down
the line, a government with the familiar executive functions and
processes for its election/formation. Instead, we got more
intergovernmentalism, as in the form of the European Semester for
economic governance. The Union thus remains a coalition of
nation-states, each of which promotes its parochial agenda.

Against this backdrop, consensus building is not the legacy of old
elites who are out of touch with reality. It is the necessary
condition for the preservation of the EU as we know it. With things as
they are, if a small group of countries can decide for the rest what
the policies will be, then tensions will naturally rise as the
underrepresented voices will rightly point out that their national
interests are ignored. The principle of consensus is a shrewd
compromise with the realities of European affairs and must therefore
be understood as one of the Union's redeeming qualities, however
awkward it may be in practice.

This is all without even considering the specifics of such a new
coalition. Georgia Meloni was a neofascist until recently and is now
superficially Europeanist perhaps because the EU is itself more
aggressive on the migration front. The UK went through the whole
"Brexit means Brexit" shadow play and has its own share of massive
internal problems. As for Poland, it had an anti-EU government until
recently... That these countries have some supposed "strong traditions
of debate", as Harold James puts it, is a dangerously complacent
narrative for policy-making. We cannot rely on "traditions" as
substitutes for strong democratic institutions. The EU has had enough
of the former and it is high time it develops the latter.

Fundamentally, the notion that we need new Franco-Germans to take the
baton from the old ones does nothing to undo the violation of the
principle of "no taxation without representation". We will be dragged
into wars because, say, the Brits and the Poles are eager to fight the
Russians, and we will not have the means to participate meaningfully
in those decisions. Sure, we may no longer have to deal with Germany's
insistence on austerity, but we will be introducing a whole new range
of similar problems. Whatever supposed gains are of dubious quality.

The European Union will continue to go from one crisis to the next and
to develop policies on an ad-hoc basis. This has been its modus
operandi and there is no sign it will change course. What remains to
be determined is whether such a method is suitable for the challenges
ahead. I think that in critical moments European leaders will be
focused enough to adopt bold decisions. Though I am not sure those
will be in the longer-term interest of democracy at the EU level.

The question then for us citizens is whether we care about European
democracy or not. If we do, then we have to campaign for thoroughgoing
institutional reforms with the end goal of replacing intergovernmentalism
with participatory EU procedures. If we do not care though, then we
might as well go ahead with whatever coalition of states works best in
the present moment. But let us at least do so with honesty and not
pontificate about our lofty "traditions of debate" because,
apparently, we do not care about them in practice.
