---
title: "Individual responsibility beside politics"
excerpt: "Commentary on how we can make things happen in our communities despite that occurs in the world of politics."
---

In an episode for the _Team Human_ podcast titled [Post-Election
Monologue: This Game is Not Reality](https://www.teamhuman.fm/episodes/303-rushkoff-post-election-monologue-this-game-is-not-reality),
host Douglas Rushkoff provides a thoughtful commentary on the bigger
picture of contemporary social and political trends in light of the
presidential elections in the United States of America. Douglas'
salient point is to not rely too much on state institutions or,
rather, to understand that we have a role to play beyond the formal
workings of government. This is encapsulated nicely in the closing words:

> I encourage you all to breath, to speak with loved ones, to meet
> your neighbours, to engage as fruitfully and charitably as you can,
> to do favours for people, to ask for favours from people; put the
> social back into socialism and stop worrying about the politics for
> the moment.

What Douglas describes is the workings of a community. I have long now
been convinced that this is the way forward for a more peaceful
society. What the average person experiences now is alienation,
disenfranchisement, and loneliness. They spend most of their day in
closed spaces, within an urban setting, lacking a strong social
network around them, deprived of sufficient sunlight, and perennially
stressed.

I spent years living in large cities where I did not know my
neighbours at a human level. The few times I tried to be friendly, I
was met with a cautious "hello" and a polite, albeit distant,
"goodbye". After a while, I stopped greeting people on the street,
despite my friendly demeanour. It was soul-crashing to not say
anything when I would rather wish somebody a good morning and, should
they need, help them with whatever I could.

This is the norm in cities: to not trust those around you and to try
to rely on your own devices or those of a select few individuals you
know. You cannot trust those around you because they come and go. Your
neighbour today will not be there long-term for a number of reasons.
They have no roots in the given milieu. You do not know who their
parents are, what their grandparents are doing, and who they are
friends with. As such, social relations are limited to a smaller
circle of like-minded individuals which, in turn, creates a real-world
filter bubble that is then turbo-charged by social media into levels
of extremism and paranoia.

I made the difficult choice to abandon the comforts of the megalopolis
in pursuit of a more humane---a communitarian---way of living. Here in
the mountains I greet and am greeted by virtually everybody. For
example, I have a safety vest that I got as a gift from a person who
had noticed me walking the dog during twilight. The man called me to
his garage, where we got to know each other, and gifted me this vest.
I did not even know his name (or he mine) before that encounter, yet
we were aware we were living in this remote place where cooperation is
a prerequisite to harmonious social experiences. In return, I helped
him over the years with lots of chores.

There are many such stories, including those that involve the hut I
built. I will not forget the day when a local from the nearby village
drove by when I was doing a video call, reached to my room's window,
and told me he had brought that some materials I could use to improve
my building. I never asked for anything and did not know this person
before but, again, we develop mutual trust through our deeds. At the
time, I wrote [Anonymity and community](https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2023-09-19-anonymity-community/),
which is a commentary on the fact that too much privacy is not
conducive to a communitarian life: you need to put yourself out there,
to be available for others, to come to terms with the fact that others
will talk about you, and to recognise that people trust what they can
measure. From that article I posted:

> Eponymity engenders a sense of trust as the person is a known
> quantity and their actions are traceable. Each member’s identity is
> common knowledge. It thus forms part of the community’s shared
> narratives and collective notion of selfhood. Narratives are about
> who is who, who does what, what happens where, and so on. They
> concern the people in the place, drawing linkages between the two
> magnitudes of community and locality.

This is all against the backdrop of my experience in institutionalised
politics par excellence. When I was working at the European
Parliament, I felt that I was operating at a level of abstraction that
was decoupled from the quotidian life of those people in communities.
Citizens are almost understood as mere numbers, disembodied agents of
aggregate patterns. I would spend my energy analysing what the
European Commission is doing, how the European Central Bank is
conducting its policies, what the various political groups are
concerned with and, generally, how an impersonal apparatus of power,
the legal-institutional order of the European Union and its Member
States, was concerned with its own survival and proliferation.

As I understood the disconnect between the world of politics and that
of everyday affairs, I also realised that the thinking, philosophical
or otherwise, that appealed to me the most was the one that applied to
day-to-day issues. I dismissed grand theories of social reform, from
Platon's utopia to the fantasy world of Marxists, all the way to the
imaginary collective of the nation as a secular deity that embodies
statehood. In 2019 (five years ago!?) I wrote [Against the secularised
theology of statecraft](https://protesilaos.com/politics/2019-06-14-secularised-theology-statecraft/),
but did not revisit this essay to see how I have evolved intellectually.

The point is that I remain of the view that what we need is to not
neglect personal qualities. Virtue matters today as much as it
mattered in the small colonies and city-states of the ancient Greeks.
To be honest, to conduct yourself with kindness, to have honour in how
you treat others and yourself, to be close to nature such that you
understand your place as part of a cosmos that does not revolve around
you. This is the world where people are not divided along partisan
lines; where matters of identity, of claiming to be someone or doing
something, are secondary as deeds speak for themselves.

There is still a need for politics at a level of authority above that
of the local communities. What matters though, is to remain committed
to a bottom-up understanding of social organisation where the
individual, their family, their neighbour, and clan at-large ("clan"
literally or figuratively) assume responsibility for their actions,
contribute to the preservation of their shared spaces, and act in
solidarity towards those whom they can trust all around them. We do
not need to remake the world for this to happen. What is of import is
that we each do our part and not render ourselves helpless by hoping
that some state actor will perform our duties in our stead.
