---
title: "Europe's permanent austerity calls for a rethink"
excerpt: "The EU makes it practically impossible for elected governments to act. How then should we approach this challenge."
---

Writing for Project Syndicate in an article titled [Macron and Europe’s Centrists Are Out of Good Options](https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/emmanuel-macron-france-eu-fiscal-rules-no-good-options-by-yanis-varoufakis-2024-07),
Yanis Varoufakis describes how the constraints of European Union
politics make it hard for centrists in France to fend off the extreme
right juggernaut of Marine Le Pen:

> There are three ways that such dissimilar economies [France and
> Germany] can remain within a single market. The first is through a
> proper federation built on a fiscal union – the path that Macron
> invited the Germans to take, to no avail. The second option is a
> gradual currency devaluation for France – a path that Macron and the
> rest of the political center have sworn not to take. That leaves the
> third option: permanent austerity, which is the root cause of
> today’s political impasse.

For over a decade now, we have known all too well that Europe's de
facto economic policy is austerity. There is no politically viable
alternative within the confines of Europe's economic governance,
exactly because there is no Union-wide administration with the
legitimacy to tend to the needs of the whole. The government of each
member state is accountable only to its own citizens and, as it ought
to, cares what its electorate wants (i.e. it promotes its national
interest). Hence, the mismatch between policies with an EU-wide reach
and democracies that form along national lines: a phenomenon I
describe as "sovereignty mismatch".

A fully fledged European federation cannot happen under normal
circumstances. National governments that pursue their parochial
agendas will not give up their sovereignty. The only way this can be
done---and has been the modus operandi hitherto---is through a process
of gradualism, of creating _faites accomplis_ at the supranational
level, waiting for a crisis to force the hand of politicians, and then
consolidating those holdings in the form of a new treaty. Rinse and
repeat. This is, in short, the history of the European integration
process, which is how we have monetary union with no fiscal union; a
central bank with no counterparty treasury; economic governance, but
no European government.

What Yanis Varoufakis correctly points out is a fixture of European
affairs, not some transient arrangement of factors that will change
over the short-term. Leaders of all ideological persuasions have to
deal with this reality. And, yes, this includes a potential Le Pen as
president of France. She too will be in the same predicament:

- An EU federation is political anathema to nationalists (and not only);
- Euro-exit and devaluation of the currency amid radical market
  uncertainty is a calamity waiting to happen;
- Austerity is the only viable option.

Shrewd decision-makers know that they cannot wait for the world to
change before they make their move. They will work with what is
available, meaning that they will implement austerity where they have
no other choice and push against it whenever that is expedient. For
there to be a major upset to the status quo, there will need to be
coalitions of governments willing to either cooperate outside the EU
framework or force some kind of new exception to the economic
governance of the Union. At any rate, one government cannot
unilaterally change things.

A Le Pen presidency may not be a major problem for Europe per se,
though it is dangerous in terms of the precedent it sets. A global
power and core EU country will be making a decisive turn to the
extreme right, departing from the liberal orthodoxy of the past
decades. This will only embolden others to do the same at which point
the EU will be in trouble.

The hard dilemma then for those on the left who are not
unconditionally pro-EU is whether they run on a federalist platform
for Europe or become more open about the repatriation of sovereign
competences. This is not an easy choice prima facie because it runs
the risk of injecting nationalistic palaver in many a discourse.
Though it can be done right, by rooting it in a civic understanding of
the nation as the only space where democracy is practised in the EU
right now.

It is a mistake to equate everything national with the far-right: the
nation does not belong to them. It is also strategically suspect to
identify with the EU, given that thoroughgoing reforms to its policies
are practically impossible. Even a potential European fiscal capacity
of some sort is no guarantee that the perma-austerity will be
dismantled. It might actually remain the default course of action and
be supported by mechanisms that further limit what elected governments
can do.

The experience of the Euro shows us that a one-size-fits-all approach
is not equally viable for all member states. The needs of some
countries cannot be met within those confines. We also know that
incomplete legal-institutional arrangements, such as monetary union
without a commensurate fiscal union, greatly limit what elected
governments can do. Against this backdrop, the known magnitude of
national democracy is more attainable than some theoretical European
federation which may well continue to be too rigid for each country's
particular needs.
