---
title: "The rhetoric of negation is a losing strategy"
excerpt: "Comment on how the political left cannot win if it is not decisive about what it actually wants."
---

Writing for _Jacobin_ magazine in a piece titled [It’s Happening
Again](https://jacobin.com/2024/11/its-happening-again-trump-election-win/),
Matt Karp comments on Trump's reelection:

> Between the global hex of inflation, the slow creep of dealignment,
> and the Biden fiasco, the prospects for a Republican victory in 2024
> were always large. Trump himself seemed to recognize this better
> than the pundit class, running a cavalier campaign that junked much
> of his rhetorical “populism” for an embrace of billionaire budget
> cutters like Elon Musk.

_Jacobin_ has long maintained a clear position about the shortcomings
of the Democrat party, which we can summarise as not appealing to the
average person and working-class people. The Democrats are not
leftists per se, though they do have such forces among their ranks.
Still, their leadership has been committed to the neoliberal
consensus, while their most obvious form of progressivism is perhaps
the least substantive one: the tandem of identity politics and virtue
signalling.

Harris ran on a platform of negation and empty words. Instead of
talking about policies, her campaign was a mixture of tokenistic
inclusiveness (basically, "vote for me because of how I look") and
name-calling of Trump. This cannot be a winning strategy. Telling
voters how morally dubious the other person is does not convince them
that you are necessarily better, let alone competent. There needs to
be a decisive positive message that engenders hope in the hearts of
people; a narrative that also highlights the skills of the candidate
and not whether they check all the boxes on the political correctness
list.

I watched lots of Harris' clips and never heard anything remotely
decisive from her. Every piece of footage was of her covering safe
talking points, with no strong commitments, and no vision on a reform
agenda. She presented herself as the bland, pro-establishment, Biden
2.0 candidate.

Trump has obvious authoritarian traits, which nobody should dismiss as
a mere expression of his flamboyant persona, though he does get one
thing right: he speaks to the average person and has a no-nonsense
attitude that engenders trust. It is not about the content of his
speech, but the manner in which he is communicating.

The class dealignment mentioned in Matt Karp's article is no mere
coincidence. This election, recent history, as well as what was
evident in the 20th century, tell us that the far-right can and does
appeal to the working class. This is because of how clear and
relatable its messaging is compared to the typically smug
intellectualism we find on the political left: it addresses everyday
issues and has a message of hope. Sure, we can discuss the substantive
parts, but the populist characteristics ("populist" in the sense of
"pro-people", broad-based talk as opposed to "elitist", technocratic
palaver) are always present.

Countering the juggernaut of fascism is not easy because it involves
self-criticism from everyone among the opposition parties. I am
concerned that the Democrats will not be introspective in this regard
and will put the blame for their own failures on whatever the
equivalent of "class unconscious" is to them.

What is of immediate interest to me is what is happening in Europe.
The rise of the far-right is a secular trend, powered by demographic
and economic pressures. It will not go away anytime soon. Financial
crises do transmogrify into crises of core values and fundamental
rights. We have been on this trajectory post 2008. I am afraid that
left-of-centre parties have lost touch with their traditional
electoral bases and that their contemporary headline issue of positive
discrimination in the name of inclusiveness is not a sustainable
position long-term due to the fact that it is inherently
discriminatory.

The European Union is not a single country, so we will not have the
same dynamics we witness in the United States of America. The
intricate nature of the EU's legal-institutional arrangements make it
hard---nay, virtually impossible---for any government to unilaterally
upset the status quo (e.g. a "Frexit", else a French exit from the
euro area, would lead to an immediate economic calamity for France due
to the self-fulfilling cycle of currency devaluation), though we have
to prepare for the inevitable rightward concerted action at the
intergovernmental level.

Given how the new European Commission is so keen on Europeanising
defence policy, we might end up in a scenario where we are called to
defend a Europe of autocracy, not of basic liberties. It thus is of
paramount importance to not be complacent and to have a healthy dose
of self-criticism. Hopefully, the politicians involved will learn from
the failures of the Democrats to not adopt a rhetoric of negation but
to instead formulate a compelling agenda of thoroughgoing reforms that
are of immediate interest to the average person.
