---
title: "No future for hopeless Europeans"
excerpt: "Comment on the political situation in Europe concerning intergenerational matters."
---

Writing for _Social Europe_ in an article titled [No Europe for young
men](https://www.socialeurope.eu/no-europe-for-young-men), professor
Jan Zielonka comments on the shortcomings of democratic regimes in
planning for the interests of the youth. Referring to policies that
benefit future generations, the professor remarks:

> Unfortunately, most of these promises and pledges have been broken
> repeatedly, even by seemingly responsible democratic leaders. This
> is because politicians cannot ignore the electoral arithmetic. When
> faced with difficult choices, those who have votes prevail. This is
> how democracy works; it gives the majority of the day what they want
> – and those are likely not-so-young people.

The salient point is that in an increasingly ageing population, there
are fewer young people to stand up for their own interests. Combined
with the workings of democratic decision-making, the argument goes,
young people are basically marginalised and end up being exploited by
the older folk.

I think such framing is problematic because it assumes that these
vaunted new generations are somehow not related to the older ones. To
me, it is a bizarre premise. I have never met a parent or grandparent
who actively vote to ruin the future of their descendants. Those
age-based interests must be more nuanced than what they seem.

Furthermore, we have to entertain the inverse scenario of a
predominantly young population. Would those people not be interested
in the wellness of their parents and grandparents? Again, I find this
hard to believe.

The notion that democracy is ill suited to cope with challenges that
require longer-term commitments is also suspect. A totalitarian system
would still have to consider the costs and benefits of every decision
on the time axis because failure could spell the end of its reign.
There are economic crises, natural disasters, and foreign countries
eager to exploit any obvious weakness in an attempt to create a fait
accompli on the international stage. Without tending to immediate
issues, the authorities will no longer enjoy the support or
acquiescence of the people and will ultimately be ousted. Hence the
age-old mode of governance for "bread and circuses" which necessarily
are done for those present.

Intergenerational justice is a laudable end. Though it is hard to
express in terms of tangible policy proposals and even harder to
assess the effectiveness thereof. How can we know that any given
programme will guarantee a decent life for the people who will be born
in 2050, for example? And what does a "decent life" even entail? Most
Europeans nowadays would find it extremely difficult to live without a
smartphone and the occasional flight/vacation abroad. But are those
necessary components of a decent life? I doubt it.

The more I think about this, I can only conclude that politicians who
bring up the ageist problématique are either naive or are actively
distracting people from more fundamental issues that plague our
countries. Let us talk about how democracy is rapidly degenerating
into plutocracy. When environmental protection laws are weakened, for
example, we have to wonder how much of that is due to an ageing
population and how much is because of vested corporate interests
lobbying policy-makers to do their bidding. In this light, media
ownership has to be brought under scrutiny, both the traditional
outlets (TV, newspapers, radio, ...) and social media. When a handful
of economic elites or deranged billionaires exerts control over most
communication channels, we cannot pretend that citizens are voting
freely and that their age group is the predominant cause of their
putative short-term thinking.

Those granted, I know from personal experience that there is a path to
sustainability and it can happen now without revolutionary reforms. It
requires personal courage to live with less and to endure some
discomfort. If the people of today and tomorrow care so much about
their future, then maybe they should stop waiting for some magical
grand bargain to come out of government bureaus or be formulated in
the ivory towers of academia. Instead, individuals or small groups of
like-minded people can abandon the megacities, move to the
countryside, and work with what is available there, pooling resources
and expertise as the needs arise.

This is not a turn to the Stone Age, as one can still benefit from
technological advances, such as the Internet for remote work. It is a
new power impulse of decisiveness; a turn to a lifestyle of initiative
and localised solidarity. The youth, or anyone else for that matter,
are not hopeless: they have developed tunnel vision and are thus
conditioned to expect everything from their rulers. We can theorise
about the evils of global capitalism, the constraints in the existing
legal-institutional arrangements of the world, or whatnot, but the
gist of the matter is that we can act virtuously despite those
magnitudes.
