---
title: "Interpretation of an ancient Greek song: “Seikilos Epitaph”"
excerpt: "Translation of---and philosophical commentary on---an ancient Greek song."
---

The Seikilos Epitaph is an ancient Greek song which (apparently?) is
the oldest complete song we know of.  It is a wonderful piece of art
with a profound philosophical outlook.  There are lots of versions
available, though I prefer the one performed by _Lyre 'n' Rhapsody_, a
band I discovered recently and admire:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Vkcolt-nmU>.

An honourable mention goes to the SEIKILOS channel for their
remarkable work in bringing ancient melodies to life while adding new
ones to the mix:
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5mCqBulD2KzLugC1lEEedA>.

[ The name Seikilos (Σείκιλος) is pronounced as "Sea-key-loss". ]

Below are the original lyrics, my translation of them into modern
Greek and English, and some further commentary.

```
[ Ancient ]

Ὅσον ζῇς φαίνου
μηδὲν ὅλως σὺ λυποῦ
πρὸς ὀλίγον ἔστι τὸ ζῆν
τὸ τέλος ὁ χρόνος ἀπαιτεῖ

[ Modern ]

Όσο ζεις φέγγε
Καθόλου μην λυπάσαι
Λίγη είναι η ζωη
Το τέλος ο χρόνος απαιτεί
```

```
While alive shine
Grieve none at all
Life amounts to little
Time demands the end
```

This song is an epitaph, meaning that it was written on a tomb.
Seikilos copes with the loss of a loved one by acknowledging the
powerlessness of the human condition.  From our perspective, time is
invincible, while life is a miracle we can only experience
moment-by-moment.  There is no living in the past or the future.  What
is, is present.

We cannot undo what has transpired.  We cannot prevent what is to
come.  All we can do is control our attitude towards the here-and-now.
We can either deny what the global magnitudes are, and forever suffer
for not being able to exert control over them, or we can live
peacefully in the knowledge that the cosmos does not revolve around
us.

It is natural to cry.  Part of our humanity is to develop emotional
attachments.  Seikilos is not prompting us to not grieve the loss of
the ones we love.  To feel sad is human.  What the poet is saying is
that our life at-large is not a matter of our volition.  We do not
choose mortality, just as we did not choose to live.  Other forces
contribute to this eventuality, which we may name "nature", "the
gods", "the cosmos"...  It does not matter what name we use, for as
long as we recognise the underlying fact: our life is not "ours"---we
have no involvement in the matter.

[ Watch: [Harmony, tranquillity,
non-ownership](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-09-22-harmony-tranquility-non-ownership/)
]

What we can influence is the attitude we maintain towards what is
already set in motion.  At least such is the impression we get.  Be
content with what the gods have given you, the good and the bad, the
plenty and the few.  Be content because the alternative is an
insatiable desire, a fool's gambit.  You can never have enough of
whatever it is you want, as it will be alienated from you in one way
or another, or always remain elusive.

When we seek the unattainable, we are reminded of our powerlessness
while remaining in denial of it.  This makes us suffer.  Instead of
trying to "shine", we are unsettled, empty, dead inside.

What does shining amount to?  Nothing fancy.  It consists in
acceptance.  Recognise who you are: what you can and cannot do; what
you can and cannot have.  Admit to what the case is; to what your life
renders possible.  Live within your means.  Live in moderation.

[ Watch: [On meditation, walking, and
acceptance](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-10-07-meditation-walking-acceptance/)
as well as [On self-importance and elitism](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-10-09-self-importance-elitism/) ]

We can do nothing about matters of life and death, just as we can do
nothing about owning or disowning whatever it is we like or dislike.
A shift in our attitude does not alter the fundamentals of our state.
It simply changes how we look at them.  We no longer are inimical
towards our self.  We stop cursing our luck and blaming ourselves as
"deffective", "ugly", "failure", etc.  We accept what we have.

"What if it is not enough?", you might say.  That is your insatiable
attitude speaking.  Adjust it so that it is enough.

Is this a happy message?  No.  You think those who appear to have
"stuff" are happier than you?  You think that time will not go after
them?  You think they do not suffer in other ways than yours?

When one day you find yourself walking alone in a forest, don't lament
your loneliness.  Thank the gods for experiencing that moment: the
walk, the forest, the vastness and ever-presence of this world.

The cosmos is ever-lasting.  Life always is.  What we perceive as
birth and death are phases in an incessant cycle of transfiguration.
This too, is not our affair.  Whether we experience life before or
after this one is unknown.  It must still be outside our control
though, for one cannot be the cosmos.

Shine, then, as the alternative is too burdensome for us feeble
beings.

[ Watch: [Being breakable and taking it
slow](https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-09-30-being-breakable-taking-it-slow/) ]
