---
title: "Interpretation of “Pizzica di San Vito” by Elodie"
excerpt: "Translation of---and philosophical commentary on---a song whose title is 'Pizzica di San Vito'."
---

As I have written before in [an interpretation unlike the
others](https://protesilaos.com/interpretations/2022-09-01-marina-dakanali-songs/),
these "interpretations" of mine are misleading: I pick a song whose
lyrics I interpret in a way that forwards a philosophical point I
would anyway make.  The idea is to present philosophical ideas in a
more approachable way, while also introducing the reader to works of
culture they may be unfamiliar with.  However, with this method of
exposition, I inadvertently give the impression that I am a philosophy
nerd, obsessed with rationality.  Nothing could be further from the
truth, hence the point I make in several publications about the "fully
fledged human being": we are not purely rational; we have emotions as
well as needs of the body.  Reducing art to rationality is misguided,
as we can both _think_ and _feel_ in artistic terms.

Poetically, polytheism is helpful in this regard, because it
disambiguates archetypes of what we would analytically associate with
"the mind" from those of "the body".  Apollon is not Dionysos, though
both are part of the human experience and none is more important than
the other.

Consider, then, this modern take on traditional rhythms from Southern
Italy, including its Griko milieux:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dypsbQCdC9U> .  The lyrics do not
matter.  The meaning of words fades away as we are invited to dance
along.

Both Elodie's "Pizzica di San Vito" and the rich tradition it draws
from are Dionysian.  It is all about the festival, the feelings art
engenders, the kind of expression that culminates in the loss of
self-awareness: "you" no longer exist when you fully give in to the
music, for "you" cease operating at your own rhythm for the duration
of the event.  If one is feeling too shy to act, more expressive
friends, wine, mushrooms---or whatever---will make them budge.

Apollon and Dionysos are not opposites.  They are different facets of
an otherwise singular human experience.  The idea thus is to find a
balance in our life between all the facets of our being.  Don't be too
rational, but also not too emotional; not too spiritual but also not
too corporeal.

Let us then consider: which is the way to Puglia?  Asking for
friend...

**UPDATE 2022-12-07 09:28 +0200:** The ~3-hour video of _La Notte
della Taranta_ 2022 edition, if you are really feeling it:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5da7NE8iRxE>.
