---
title: "Interpretation of an ancient Persian song: “Dokhtare Boyer Ahmadi”"
excerpt: "Philosophical commentary inspired by an ancient Persian song."
---

I have been following the SEIKILOS channel for a while.  They revive
ancient melodies from across the world, while offering the platform to
talented musicians to share their original high quality compositions:
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5mCqBulD2KzLugC1lEEedA>.

[ The name Seikilos (Σείκιλος) is pronounced as "Sea-key-loss". ]

One such song is _Dokhtare Boyer Ahmadi_, which they translate as _The
Girl from Boyer Ahmadi_: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9wNI42InnM>.
I do not understand the language yet here I am about to provide
philosophical commentary on what I have just listened to.

I used to be a rationalist.  If something was not reducible to reason,
it was not reliable.  Until one day I paid attention to my behavioural
patterns.  Why was I chasing sunsets?  What was so special in the
close-up photo of a flower?  How can I be impressed by beauty when I
cannot even provide an exact definition of what it is?  The absence of
a definition does not mean that the concept is arbitrary or, indeed,
meaningless.  We can still discern patterns intuitively, telling apart
the beautiful from that which is not.

The rationalist cannot understand beauty because it is not reducible
to reason.  Or, to put it differently, it has to be stripped of its
qualities to become reasonable, at which point it no longer is what
engendered the original impression.

To appreciate beauty we must let go of the dogma that the human being
can behave as a fraction of itself.  To be human is to exhibit a
multifaceted nature, where the reasonable and the aesthetic co-exist
not as counterparts but as complements.

Ancient cultures celebrated the multiplicity of the human condition.
They knew that the human being can be wise, insightful, creative,
harmonious, passionate, as well as destructive.  It is entirely
possible for a person to sing and make love on one day, only to
prepare for war on the next one.  This is not about the often
untenable binary of good versus evil.  Rather, it is a product of
complexity: complexity of constitution; complexity of the factors at
play.

It is why I believe the attempts to describe humans as either
Apollonian or Dionysian caricatures are misguided.  There is no choice
to be made.  The ancient gods are archetypes, poetic representations
of patterns inherent to the human condition.  They are made by us, in
our image, for our needs, to help us communicate the complexity of
what we experience in a manner that is symbolic and elegant.  The
mistake of those who operate aloof from the ancient cultural milieux
is to pick sides instead of trying to tend to all facets of their
being.

People are not archetypes.  They cannot be abstracted away from the
particularities of their life and turned into concepts.  They cannot
subsist _in vitro_ as the thought experiment of some intellectual.
They are in the here-and-now of their actions, having to make
decisions in the face of uncertainty, in evolving circumstances
outside their control, facing trade-offs with available choices that
are imperfect.  They will reason, they will be emotional, they will be
intimate, they will be awestruck.

[ Watch: [The golden fleece and impossible standards](https://protesilaos.com/books/2023-04-24-golden-fleece-impossible-standards/) ]

Returning to the idea of beauty, we often associate it with
subjectivity.  I think the difference between the subjective and the
objective is one of degree.  When we place two people in the same
conditions only to get different results, we are not dealing with
arbitrariness.  There still is an underlying mechanism that is shared;
a mechanism that triggers feedback loops.  We simply fail to
appreciate how each person is not a single factor but a system of
factors in their interplay.  The experiment, then, cannot be limited
to how person A responds to stimulus X, because A has to be analysed
further into the multitude of subsystems that contribute to its
evolving state of being.

When we expect predictability in everything we do, we labour under the
assumption that the world is---or should be---simple throughout.  It
is why we expect/want person B to respond to X the same as A.
Accepting complexity in practice means tolerating uncertainty.  We
recognise how not everything we experience can be explained precisely,
while we let go of the value judgement that such "irrational" cases
are inherently bad or worthless.

The _Girl from Boyer Ahmadi_ reminds me of how I liberated myself from
the shackles of rationalism, to admit to the multifacetedness of my
actuality, to experience aesthetics aesthetically, and to be at peace
with the fact that I will never have a definition for that which I can
nevertheless spot without mistake.
