---
title: "Re: difference between ef-themes and modus-themes for Emacs?"
excerpt: "My reply to what the difference is between the 'ef-themes' and 'modus-themes' for Emacs."
---

I added the following to the manual of the `ef-themes`.  It is a
modified version of my reply to a question posted by Saša Janiška on
the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C87pme7w10b.fsf%40atmarama.ddns.net%3E>.

* * *

The main difference between the two projects is that the
`modus-themes` are much more strict with maintaining the highest
standard for contrast (I won't delve into the technicalities, though
the manual of the `modus-themes` does elaborate on the minutiae).
Whereas the `ef-themes` do not have such a commitment: they are
legible, but might go a bit below the desired target in certain cases.

For the user who has already narrowed their search to the Modus and Ef
themes, the criterion should be the eye test.  If any of those items
looks good/usable, then that is what matters.  A bit of
experimentation provides greater insight than tomes on theoretical
nuances---no value in overthinking it.

Between the `ef-themes` and the `modus-themes`, I provide a broad
range of options for users who need varying degrees of legibility.
The `modus-themes` are the ones with the highest contrast.

I have always maintained the view that (i) there is no such thing as a
one-size-fits-all for accessibility due to innate differences in
colour perception between individuals as well as hardware
capabilities, and (ii) no theme can handle accessibility on its own,
as one needs to consider typography as well as environmental factors.

[ For my preferred typography, check Iosevka Comfy:
  <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/iosevka-comfy-pictures>. ]

Technically, the very high contrast of the `modus-themes` demands that
they are not---and can never be---as colourful as the `ef-themes`.
Their colours are less saturated.  In terms of presentation, this
means that the `modus-themes` may appear more minimalist (or "clean")
once one gets used to their level of contrast.  In general: do not
trust initial impressions and give the themes a fair chance (if one is
used to low contrast settings, the `modus-themes` feel hard to get
used to, though this is natural as the eye adapts accordingly).

The `ef-themes` are more colourful, which can make them more/less
pleasant to work with, depending on one's subjectivity.  Within the
`ef-themes`, there is considerable diversity, as each of the 20 items
has its own character, expressed as a unique colour palette and colour
mapping.  No two themes are alike.  For example, for light themes
`ef-summer` gives the user a completely different vibe than
`ef-frost`, while for dark themes `ef-bio` and `ef-cherie` each have
their unique charm.

I cannot possibly say which the "best" is.  This is a subjective
evaluation.  For me personally, both projects are technically
excellent in terms of conforming with their stated ends.
Aesthetically, I like them all, which is why I develop/maintain them.
I am not prioritising one over the others.

Note that I am emphasising legibility, though this should not discount
the meticulous work that goes into thematic consistency.  I do not
write about this topic because it does not really matter to the
average user.  Consistency is not something that should actively be
calling for one's attention, though it is "there" for those who wish
to pay attention.  In short: I am not picking random colours and
implementing them on a whimsy.  Theme development is not easy.
