---
title: 'Emacs: lin version 0.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my lin package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Lin is a stylistic enhancement for Emacs' built-in `hl-line-mode`.  It
remaps the `hl-line` face (or equivalent) buffer-locally to a style that
is optimal for major modes where line selection is the primary mode of
interaction.

The idea is that `hl-line-mode` cannot work equally well for contexts
with competing priorities: (i) line selection, or (ii) simple line
highlight.  In the former case, the current line needs to be made
prominent because it carries a specific meaning of some significance in
the given context: the user has to select a line.  Whereas in the latter
case, the primary mode of interaction does not revolve around the line
highlight itself: it may be because the focus is on editing text or
reading through the buffer's contents, so the current line highlight is
more of a reminder of the point's location on the vertical axis.

Here is an illustration of Lin in the lower window as compared to the
default subtle style of `hl-line-mode` in the upper window (using the
`modus-operandi` theme from [my
modus-themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes) package):

<a href="{{'/assets/images/attachments/2021-11-01-lin-modus-operandi-demo.png' | absolute_url }}"><img alt="Modus Operandi with LIN active" src="{{ '/assets/images/attachments/2021-11-01-lin-modus-operandi-demo.png' | absolute_url }}"/></a>

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 0.2.0 on 2022-03-16

Rewrote the entirety of `lin.el` to make the configuration easier and
keep the code streamlined.  The gist is that now Lin automatically
enables `hl-line-mode` in every mode implied by `lin-mode-hooks`.  Here
is how Lin should be set up henceforth:

    (require 'lin)
    
    (setq lin-face 'lin-blue) ; check doc string for alternative styles
    
    (lin-setup) ; Either run this or change `lin-mode-hooks'
    
    (customize-set-variable
     'lin-mode-hooks ; do not use `setq' with this; `customize-set-variable' runs `lin-setup' automatically
     '(dired-mode-hook
       elfeed-search-mode-hook
       git-rebase-mode-hook
       ibuffer-mode-hook
       ilist-mode-hook
       ledger-report-mode-hook
       log-view-mode-hook
       magit-log-mode-hook
       mu4e-headers-mode
       notmuch-search-mode-hook
       notmuch-tree-mode-hook
       occur-mode-hook
       org-agenda-mode-hook
       tabulated-list-mode-hook))

The manual has been updated to reflect those changes:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin>.

Thanks to:

-   Christian Tietze for showing how the Lin face can use colors from the
    macOS palette.  The original contribution was in merge request 2:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/lin/-/merge_requests/2>.  Now we
    provide the `lin-mac` and `lin-mac-override-fg` faces.  These can be
    assigned as a value to the user option `lin-face`.

-   Damien Cassou for suggesting that Lin sets itself up for a list of
    mode hooks.  The original contribution was in merge request 3:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/lin/-/merge_requests/3>.  It has now
    been rewritten as the `lin-mode-hooks` user option, though the idea is
    the same.

-   Federico Stilman for adding `mu4e-headers-mode` to the list that
    Damien had provided and which now lives as `lin-mode-hooks`.
    Federico's contribution was sent as a patch via email.
