---
title: "Accessibility and software freedom"
subtitle: "A free software license is not enough"
excerpt: "A free software license does not necessarily empower users. High quality documentation and usable interfaces are also needed."
---

Software that conforms with [the four essential
freedoms](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) does not
necessarily empower users to be free.  To actualise their rights,
users must be able to access the program.  This expands the set of
requirements beyond the narrow confines of the free software
definition into domains of usability and accessibility.  Matters such
as illegible colour combinations and incomplete documentation deny
users the chance to employ free software in pursuit of their ends.

Software freedom has hitherto been framed in terms of legal
requirements, as a means of bending copyright law to forward the needs
of the user.  The intent is to empower those who run the program to
operate aloof from the influence of the program's creator or
distributor.  While the repurposing of copyright law is fecund, the
emphasis on code alone remains limited in scope and thus unambitious
in outlook.  The target audience is necessarily restricted to a
nucleus of enthusiasts who are more or less inclined to tinker with
the program.  Everybody else is relegated to the status of a "normal
user", else "normie".

Such a divide is unsustainable.  Hacker communities do not exist in a
vacuum.  They are influenced, framed, or otherwise conditioned by
legal-institutional arrangements beyond the field of programming.
Software freedom cannot be treated _in vitro_ as a standalone quality:
it is but a facet of freedom at-large and thus depends on the
prevailing conditions in the given political milieu.

Free software developers hold a tacit responsibility to serve the
public good.  They must care for others and have a sense of the bigger
picture.  Software freedom is not the vestige of some elite.  It has
to be readily available to all people, regardless of their skill
level.  Not simply as a matter of principle---a tokenistic claim on
rights---but in its instantiation as a common good.

Impeding and ultimately excluding the so-called "normies" runs counter
to the telos of a free society.  Providing a non-technical user with
some source code and a free license does not bestow upon them
effective freedom.  In the absence of high quality documentation and
intuitive/usable interfaces, the person remains oblivious to the
potentiality of the program and has no means of enacting the kind of
changes that software freedom renders rightful.  Such a user is
excluded from the group that enjoys the liberties of freed programs,
by virtue of their lack of expertise in the given area.

Compassion is key in dismantling those barriers to entry.  All code
should be well documented.  Manuals must come with lots of real-world
examples, not contrived abstractions that only domain experts can
grasp.  Text has to be legible at all times and information be kept to
the essentials of the task at hand.  Points of entry must be
discoverable and clearly explained in the program's accompanying study
materials.  When in doubt, developers have to default to what is
likely to work for the least experienced person.  Instructive
resources cannot assume the user has prior knowledge of all the
neighbouring issues of the task at hand: they need to be sufficiently
explanatory.

The sort of `README` file that is five lines long and tells the user
to run some arcane commands in a terminal shows a lack of compassion.
It basically expects the person to perform a leap of faith and hope
for the best, without ever putting things in context.  This is scary
for the uninitiated and makes them feel disempowered.  Same for
attitudes that go along the lines of "code should speak for itself."
Composable and clear code is of great value, though a program alone
cannot be didactic for those who do not know how to read it.
Aphorisms of this sort express a perhaps innocuous pride that is
rooted in ignorance of the wider magnitudes and in the resulting lack
of empathy.

The language has to be the one people use every day.  Technicalities
have to be explained in plain terms.  Acronyms should always be
expanded at least once and jargon be coupled with parenthetical
statements or footnotes that state the point in ordinary palaver.
Manuals should be written for a wider spectrum of users, both experts
and newcomers alike.  Make it customary to include a "how to" section
(or equivalent) that shows how things are done and go the extra mile
to explain what some snippet of code is doing.  Veterans will know
what to skip.  Everybody else will benefit from the extra effort.

"Why go through all that trouble?" the free software hacker type may
wonder.  "Why should I care when all I want is to tinker with a
program?"  The answer consists in the recognition that software
permeates every aspect of quotidian life and affects everyone
involved: it is not contained to the profession of programmers and
Information Technology administrators.  What happens in the technology
fields reverberates across society.  Software exists in a continuum of
interpersonal affairs.

While some may be taking it for granted, software freedom is in fact a
privilege.  We can afford it in principle because we live in societies
that already have rudiments of freedom in place.  These did not simply
happen nor were they always there.  They are the product of struggles
to effectively abolish arbitrariness in the interactions between
humans.  Put differently, an outright illiberal order has the capacity
to abolish software freedom altogether.  Thinking that somehow code
will always be left to operate alone is a fool's gambit.  It is
understandable why a free software programmer may show no interest in
the grand magnitudes of politics.  Nevertheless, history shows that
politics has a way of finding everyone, no matter how narrow their
niche is.  Those who do not care about what happens outside their
purview risk suffering the consequences of decisions that are made in
their absence.

The power of numbers is instrumental to the cause of freedom.  A
critical mass has the requisite exposure to reinstitute society in the
interest of liberty and thus can implement thoroughgoing reforms at
the political level.  The bigger picture perspective puts free
software developers, contributors, and evangelists in a position to
build alliances with groups that promote liberty in other aspects of
life.  There are linkages to be drawn between the different domains of
specialisation, provided one is willing to discern their potential and
make them happen, all while blithely retiring the concept of
"normies."

The call to "keep politics out of it" that is encountered in technical
fora is understandable in that it asks of contributors to remain
focused on the implementation details of the topics under discussion.
Yet it has to come with the understanding of the aforementioned
continuum and the inherently political nature of software freedom as a
facet of freedom at-large.  Free software developers are de facto
activists, even when they think they are merely flipping bits on a
computer.  They assume such a role by contributing to free software
which, in turn, has the outright political end of emancipating users
from the fetters of control, broadly understood.

Not everyone needs to pay attention to political events.  They must
simply admit they are not living in a bubble.  The practical insight
is to set a high standard for the quality of code and its accompanying
study material.  Software freedom rests on a strong documentation
culture and an ethos of caring.  This suggests a pedagogical outlook.
Developers are not merely distributing source code and a concomitant
`COPYING` license.  They have the duty to teach people; to empower
them to use, modify, distribute, and re-use programs in a manner that
makes sense to them in light of the greater good.
